THE WOLF AND THE LAMB


ONE day a Wolf and a Lamb happened to come at the same time to drink
from a brook that ran down the side of the mountain.

The Wolf wished very much to eat the Lamb, but meeting her as he did,
face to face, he thought he must find some excuse for doing so.

So he began by trying to pick a quarrel, and said angrily: “How dare
you come to my brook and muddy the water so that I cannot drink it?
What do you mean?”

The Lamb, very much alarmed, said gently: “I do not see how it can be
that I have spoiled the water. You stand higher up the stream, and the
water runs from you to me, not from me to you.”

“Be that as it may,” said the Wolf, with a snarl, “you are a rascal all
the same, for I have heard that last year you said bad things of me
behind my back.”

“Dear Mr. Wolf,” cried the poor Lamb, “that could not be, for a year
ago I was not born; I am only six months old.”

Finding it of no use to argue any more, the Wolf began to snarl and
show his teeth. Coming closer to the Lamb, he said, “You little wretch,
if it was not you it was your father, so it’s all the same”; and he
pounced upon the poor Lamb and ate her up.




THE FOX AND THE LION


A LITTLE fox was out playing one day, when a Lion came roaring along.
“Dear me,” said the Fox, as he hid behind a tree, “I never saw a Lion
before. What a terrible creature! His voice makes me tremble.”

The next time the Fox met the Lion he was not so much afraid, but he
kept a safe distance and said to himself, “I wish he would not make
such a noise!”

The third time they met, the Fox was not frightened at all. He ran up
to the Lion, and said, “What are you roaring about?”

And the Lion was so taken by surprise that, without saying a word, he
let the Fox walk away.

It would not be safe for little foxes always to follow the example of
this one; but it is often true that what our fear makes seem a lion in
the way has no danger in it if we meet it bravely.




THE DOG AND HIS SHADOW


A DOG once had a nice piece of meat for his dinner. Some say that it
was stolen, but others, that it had been given him by a butcher, which
we hope was the case.

Dogs like best to eat at home, and he went trotting along with the meat
in his mouth, as happy as a king.

On the dog’s way there was a stream with a plank across it. As the
water was still and clear, he stopped to take a look at it. What
should he see, as he gazed into its bright depths, but a dog as big as
himself, looking up at him, and lo! the dog had meat in his mouth.

“I’ll try to get that,” said he; “then with both mine and his what a
feast I shall have!” As quick as thought he snapped at the meat, but in
doing so he had to open his mouth, and his own piece fell to the bottom
of the stream.

Then he saw that the other dog had lost his piece, too. He went sadly
home. In trying to grasp a shadow he lost his substance.




THE CRAB AND HIS MOTHER


“MY child,” said a Crab to her son, “why do you walk so awkwardly? If
you wish to make a good appearance, you should go straight forward, and
not to one side as you do so constantly.”

“I do wish to make a good appearance, mamma,” said the young Crab; “and
if you will show me how, I will try to walk straight forward.”

“Why, this is the way, of course,” said the mother, as she started off
to the right. “No, this is the way,” said she, as she made another
attempt, to the left.

The little Crab smiled. “When you learn to do it yourself, you can
teach me,” he said, and went back to his play.




THE FOX AND THE GRAPES


IT WAS a sultry day, and a Fox was almost famishing with hunger and
thirst. He was just saying to himself that anything would be acceptable
to him, when, looking up, he spied some great clusters of ripe, black
grapes hanging from a trellised vine.

“What luck!” he said; “if only they weren’t quite so high, I should
be sure of a fine feast. I wonder if I can get them. I can think of
nothing that would so refresh me.”

Jumping into the air is not the easiest thing in the world for a Fox to
do; but he gave a great spring and nearly reached the lowest clusters.

“I’ll do better next time,” he said.



He tried again and again, but did not succeed so well as at first.
Finding that he was losing his strength and that he had little chance
of getting the grapes, he walked slowly off, grumbling as he did so:
“The grapes are sour, and not at all fit for my eating. I’ll leave them
to the greedy birds. They eat anything.”




THE WOLF AND THE CRANE


ONE day a Wolf, who was eating his dinner much too fast, swallowed a
bone, which stuck in his throat and pained him very much. He tried to
get it out, but could not.

Just then he saw a Crane passing by. “Dear friend,” said he to the
Crane, “there is a bone sticking in my throat. You have a good long
neck; can’t you reach down and pull it out? I will pay you well for it.”

“I’ll try,” said the Crane. Then he put his head into the Wolf’s mouth,
between his sharp teeth, and reaching down, pulled out the bone.

“There!” said the Wolf, “I am glad it is out; I must be more careful
another time.”

“I will go now, if you will pay me,” said the Crane.

“Pay you, indeed!” cried the Wolf. “Be thankful that I did not bite
your head off when it was in my mouth. You ought to be content with
that.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Gentle, kindly folk sometimes have to learn that kindness must be mixed
with caution.




THE ANTS AND THE GRASSHOPPERS


THE Ants and the Grasshoppers lived together in the great field. The
Ants were busy all the time gathering a store of grain to lay by for
winter use. They gave themselves so little pleasure that their merry
neighbors, the Grasshoppers, began at last to take scarcely any notice
of them.

When the frost came, it put an end to the work of the Ants and the
chirping and merrymaking of the Grasshoppers. But one fine winter’s
day, when the Ants were employed in spreading their grain in the sun to
dry, a Grasshopper, who was nearly perishing with hunger, chanced to
pass by.

“Good day to you, kind neighbor,” said she; “will you not lend me a
little food? I will certainly pay you before this time next year.”

“How does it happen that you have no food of your own?” asked an old
Ant. “There was an abundance in the field where we lived side by side
all summer, and your people seemed to be active enough. What were you
doing, pray?”

“Oh,” said the Grasshopper, forgetting his hunger, “I sang all the day
long, and all the night, too.”

“Well, then,” interrupted the Ant, “I must not deprive my own family
for you. If Grasshoppers find it so gay to sing away the summer, they
must starve in winter,” and she went on with her work, all the while
singing the old song, “We ants never borrow; we ants never lend.”




THE FROGS WHO ASKED FOR A KING


THERE were once some Frogs who lived together in perfect security in a
beautiful lake. They were a large company, and were very comfortable,
but they came to think that they might be still happier if they had a
King to rule over them.

So they sent to Jupiter, their god, to ask him to give them a King.

Jupiter laughed at their folly, for he knew that they were better off
as they were; but he said to them, “Well, here is a King for you,” and
into the water he threw a big Log.

It fell with such a splash that the Frogs were terrified and hid
themselves in the deep mud under the water.

By and by, one braver than the rest peeped out to look at the King, and
saw the Log, as it lay quietly on the top of the water. Soon, one after
another they all came out of their hiding places and ventured to look
at their great King.

As the Log did not move, they swam round it, keeping a safe distance
away, and at last one by one hopped upon it.

“This is not a King,” said a wise old Frog; “it is nothing but a stupid
Log. If we had a King, Jupiter would pay more attention to us.”

Again they sent to Jupiter, and begged him to give them a King who
could rule over them.



Jupiter did not like to be disturbed again by the silly Frogs, and this
time he sent them a Stork, saying, “You will have some one to rule
over you now.”

As they saw the Stork solemnly walking down to the lake, they were
delighted.

“Ah!” they said, “see how grand he looks! How he strides along! How he
throws back his head! This is a King indeed. He shall rule over us,”
and they went joyfully to meet him.

As their new King came nearer, he paused, stretched out his long neck,
picked up the head Frog, and swallowed him at one mouthful. And then
the next—and the next!

“What is this?” cried the Frogs, and they began to draw back in terror.

But the Stork with his long legs easily followed them to the water, and
kept on eating them as fast as he could.

“Oh! if we had only been—” said the oldest Frog. He was going to add
“content,” but was eaten up before he could finish the sentence.

The remaining Frogs cried to Jupiter to help them, but he would not
listen. And the Stork-King ate them for breakfast, dinner, and supper,
every day, till in a short time there was not a Frog left in the lake.
Poor, foolish Frogs, not to have known when they were well off.




THE DONKEY IN THE LION’S SKIN


A DONKEY once put on a Lion’s skin which some hunters had spread out
to dry. It did not fit the Donkey very well, but he found that in it
he could frighten all the timid, foolish little animals, so he amused
himself by chasing them about.

By and by he met a Fox, and tried to frighten him by roaring.

“My dear Donkey,” said the wise Fox, “you are braying, and not roaring.
I might, perhaps, have been frightened by your looks, if you had not
tried to roar; but I know your voice too well to mistake you for a
Lion.”




THE MICE IN COUNCIL


SOME little Mice, who lived in the walls of a house, met together
one night, to talk of the wicked Cat and to consider what could be
done to get rid of her. The head Mice were Brown-back, Gray-ear, and
White-whisker.

“There is no comfort in the house,” said Brown-back. “If I but step
into the pantry to pick up a few crumbs, down comes the Cat, and I have
hardly time to run to my nest again.”

“What can we do?” asked Gray-ear. “Shall we all run at her at once and
bite her, and frighten her away?”

“No,” said White-whisker; “she is so bold we could not frighten her. I
have thought of something better than that. Let us hang a bell round
her neck. Then, if she moves, the bell will ring, and we shall hear it,
and have time to run away.”

“O yes! yes!” cried all the Mice. “That is a capital idea. We will bell
the Cat! Hurrah! hurrah! No more fear of the Cat!” and they danced in
glee.

When their glee had subsided a little, Brown-back asked, “But who will
hang the bell round her neck?”

No one answered. “Will you?” he asked of White-whisker.

“I don’t think I can,” replied White-whisker; “I am lame, you know. It
needs some one who can move quickly.”

“Will you, Gray-ear?” said Brown-back.

“Excuse me,” answered Gray-ear; “I have not been well since that time
when I was almost caught in the trap.”

“Who will bell the Cat, then?” said Brown-back. “If it is to be done,
some one must do it.”

Not a sound was heard, and one by one the little Mice stole away to
their holes, no better off than they were before.

When there is trouble there is need of some one to act, as well as some
one to advise.




THE KID AND THE WOLF


A KID coming home alone one night met a big Wolf. “Oh, oh, I know you
will kill me,” said the little Kid; “but please play me a tune, so that
I may have one more dance before I die; I am so fond of dancing.”

“Very well,” said the Wolf, “I will try, for I should like to see you
dance before I eat you.”

Then the Wolf took up the shepherd’s pipe that was lying near, and
began to play. But while he was playing, and the Kid was dancing a jig,
the Dogs heard the sound, and came running up.

“It is my own fault,” said the Wolf, as the Dogs caught him. “My
business is to kill Kids and eat them, and not to play for them to
dance. Why did I try to be a Piper, when I am really only a Butcher?”

“You didn’t play very well, either,” said the Kid.




THE HAWK AND THE NIGHTINGALE


A NIGHTINGALE sitting on the top of an oak, singing her evening song,
was spied by a hungry Hawk, who swooped down and seized her. The
frightened Nightingale prayed the Hawk to let her go.

“If you are hungry,” said she, “why not catch some large bird? I am not
big enough for even a luncheon.”

“Do you happen to see many large birds flying about?” said the Hawk.
“You are the only bird I have seen to-day, and I should be foolish
indeed to let you go for the sake of larger birds that are not in
sight. A morsel is better than nothing.”




THE CROW AND THE PITCHER


A THIRSTY Crow once spied a pitcher, and flew to it to see if by chance
there was any water in it.

When she looked in, she saw that there was water, but that it was so
far from the top that she could not reach it, though she stretched her
neck as far as she could.

She stopped, and thought to herself, “How shall I get that water? I am
perishing with thirst, and there must be some way for me to get some
of it.” Some pebbles were lying on the ground; and, picking them up in
her beak, she dropped them one by one into the pitcher.

They sank to the bottom; and at last the water was pushed up by them to
the top, so that the Crow could easily drink it.

“Where there’s a will, there’s a way,” said the Crow.




THE ANT AND THE DOVE


AN Ant, walking by the river one day, said to himself, “How nice and
cool this water looks! I must drink some of it.” But as he began to
drink, his foot slipped, and he fell in.

“Oh, somebody please help me, or I shall drown!” cried he.

A Dove, sitting in a tree that overhung the river, heard him, and threw
him a leaf. “Climb up on that leaf,” said she, “and you will float
ashore.”

The Ant climbed up onto the leaf, which the wind blew to the shore, and
he stepped upon dry land again.

“Good-by, kind Dove,” said he, as he ran home. “You have saved my life,
and I wish I could do something for you.”

“Good-by,” said the Dove; “be careful not to fall in again.”

A few days after this, when the Dove was busy building her nest, the
Ant saw a man just raising his gun to shoot her.

He ran quickly, and bit the man’s leg so hard that he cried “Oh! oh!”
and dropped his gun.

This startled the Dove, and she flew away. The man picked up his gun,
and walked on.

When he was gone, the Dove came back to her nest.

“Thank you, my little friend,” she said. “You have saved my life.”

And the little Ant was overjoyed to think he had been able to do for
the Dove what the Dove had so lately done for him.




THE OX AND THE FROG


AN Ox, drinking at a pool, chanced to set his foot on a young Frog, and
crushed him to death.

His brothers and sisters, who were playing near, ran at once to tell
their mother what had happened. “Oh, Mother,” they cried, “a very huge
beast, with four great feet, came to the pool, and crushed our brother
to death in an instant, with his hard, cloven heel.”

The old Frog was very vain. She was rather large, as Frogs go, and gave
herself airs on account of it. “Was the cruel beast so very large?” she
said. “How big?”

“Oh!” said the young Frogs. “It was a terrible monster!”

“Was it as big as this?” she said, blowing and puffing herself out.

“Oh, much bigger,” replied the young Frogs.

“As big as this, then?” she added, puffing and blowing with all her
might.

“A great deal bigger,” they answered.

“Well, was it _so_ big?”

“Oh, Mother!” cried the Frogs; “pray do not try to be so big. If you
were to puff till you burst, you could not make yourself half so big as
the creature we tell you of.”

But the silly old Frog would not give up. She tried again to puff
herself out, saying, “As big as”—and she did indeed burst.

It is useless to attempt what is impossible.




THE BAT AND THE WEASELS


A BAT, trying to fly one day, fell to the ground, and a Weasel caught
him. The Bat begged the Weasel not to kill him.

“There is nothing I hate like a bird,” said the Weasel; “I always kill
them.”



“But I am not a bird,” said the Bat, as he folded his wings close to
his sides; “birds don’t come tumbling down as I did; and besides, don’t
you see my little smooth head, and my ears?”

“Yes, yes,” said the Weasel, “I did not notice them at first. I see,
you are a mouse”; so he let the Bat go.

Some time after, the Bat took another flight, and again fell to the
ground. Another Weasel came out of his hole and caught him.

“Pray don’t kill me,” said the Bat.

“Certainly I shall,” said the Weasel; “I kill mice wherever I find
them.”

“But stop a moment,” said the Bat, spreading his wings; “I am not a
mouse. Don’t you see my great wings? A mouse can’t fly, can it?”

“I beg your pardon,” said the Weasel; “I did not know that you were a
bird; I thought you were a mouse. I see I was mistaken.” Then he let
him go.

So the cunning Bat escaped a second time, but it is not often safe to
use such arguments.




THE FOX AND THE GOAT


A FOX once happened to fall into a deep well. He tried in every way to
get out, but at last began to think that it was impossible, and that he
must die there, a prisoner. While he was thinking how sad that would
be, a thirsty Goat came and looked down into the well, wishing that he
could get some water. He soon saw the Fox.

“Halloo,” said the Goat, “what are you doing down there? Is the water
good?”

“The best I ever tasted,” answered the Fox. “It is cool, and clear, and
delicious. Come down and try it yourself.”

“I will,” said the Goat, “for I am nearly dead with thirst.”

So he jumped down, and drank as much water as he wanted.

“Oh, how refreshing!” cried he.

“Yes,” said the Fox; “and now, if you have finished drinking, let me
ask how you expect to get out of this well again.”

“Oh, I don’t know,” replied the Goat. “How do you expect to get out?”

“That is what I have been wondering about for the last hour,” said the
Fox, “and have just now thought of a good plan. If you will put your
forefeet high up on the wall, I will climb up your back, and so get
out, and then, of course, I can help you out.”

“Very well,” said the Goat, who was a simple creature, “that is a good
plan. How I wish I had your brains!” He put his forefeet on the wall,
and the Fox easily climbed out and started to go on his way.

“Wait a moment,” called the Goat; “you forgot to help me out.”

“You foolish fellow!” said the Fox, with a mocking laugh; “you ought to
have thought how you would get out, before you jumped down. I fell in,
but you went down of your own accord. Look before you leap next time,”
and off he ran.




THE WOMAN AND HER HEN


A WOMAN had a Hen that laid an egg every day. The eggs were large, and
sold for a good price. The Woman often thought, as she took them to
market: “How glad they all are to get my eggs! I could sell as many
more just as easily.”

It began to look a small thing to her to get but a single egg each day.
“If I were to give a double allowance of barley, the Hen might be made
to lay two eggs a day instead of one,” she said.

So she doubled the food, and the Hen grew very fat and sleek; but she
stopped laying eggs.




THE DOG IN THE MANGER


A SLEEPY Dog went to the barn, and jumped into a manger full of hay,
curling himself up there for an afternoon nap.

When he had been sleeping comfortably for some time, the Oxen came in
for their supper.

The Dog awoke in a great rage at being disturbed, and began to growl
and bark at them. He would not let them get at the hay.

“Stop a moment,” said one of the Oxen. “Do you want to eat this hay?”

“No,” said the Dog; “I shouldn’t think of such a thing.”

“Very well, then,” said the Ox, “we do want to eat it, for we are
hungry and tired.”

“Oh, go away,” growled the Dog, “and let me sleep.”

“What an ugly, snappish fellow!” said the Ox. “He will neither eat the
hay himself nor let us eat it!”




THE MOUSE, THE FROG, AND THE HAWK


A MOUSE, who had always lived on the land, and a Frog, who passed most
of his time in the water, became friends.

The Mouse showed the Frog his nest and everything he could think of
that was pleasant to see; and the Frog invited the Mouse to go home
with him and see all the beautiful things that are under the water.

“Can you swim?” asked the Frog.

“Not much,” said the Mouse.



“No matter,” said the Frog; “I will tie your foot to my foot with a
piece of this strong grass, and then I can pull you along nicely.” The
Frog laughed as he said this. He thought it would be good fun for him,
but he well knew that the Mouse would not enjoy it.

When the Frog had tied the Mouse’s foot to his own, they started
together across the meadow. They soon came to the edge of the water,
and the Frog jumped in, pulling the Mouse in with him.

“Oh, how cool and nice the water is, after the dry, hot land!” said the
Frog, as he swam gayly about. But the poor Mouse was frightened.

“Please let me go,” said he, “or I shall die.”

“Oh, never mind,” said the unkind Frog; “you will get used to the
water. I just love it.”

But soon the poor Mouse was drowned, and floated up to the top of the
water, while the Frog frisked about down below.

Just then a Hawk saw the Mouse, and pounced upon it.

As he flew away with it the Frog was dragged out of the water, too, for
he was still tied to the Mouse.

“Stop, stop!” cried the Frog. “Let me go. It is the Mouse you want.”

“Come along,” said the Hawk; “I want you both. I will eat you first,
for I like Frog meat even better than I do Mouse.”

In a few moments the Hawk had made a good supper, and there was nothing
left of either the false Frog or the foolish Mouse.




THE SHEPHERD’S BOY AND THE WOLF


A MAN who had a fine flock of Sheep put them all into a field, and
hired a Boy to take care of them, while he worked near by with his Men.

The Sheep went nibbling the grass all day, up and down the hills and
along the brook; and all that the Boy had to do was to look out for the
Wolf, and see that he did not come prowling into the field.

After a while the Boy began to wish that something would happen, it
was so tiresome staying there all alone, with no one to speak to and
nothing to do. He wished he could be with the Men in the next field,
or that they could come and stay with him. All at once he thought to
himself, “I will make them think the Wolf has come. That will be great
fun.”

So he called out as loudly as he could, “Help! help! The Wolf!” and all
the Men came running up.

When they found it was only a joke, they laughed, and went back to
their work.

On the next day the Boy tried the same trick again. As before, the Men
dropped their mattocks and spades, for fear there might be danger, and
ran to the help of the Boy. He only laughed at them for their pains,
and this time they did not relish the joke. Still the Boy did not give
it up. Again he shouted “Wolf! Wolf!” till the Men took no notice of
him when he called them, no matter how loudly or how long he shouted.

After a while, the Wolf did get into the field. Then in real terror the
Boy called and called: “Pray do come and help me. The Wolf is killing
the sheep. The Wolf! the Wolf!” But no one gave heed to his cries.
Finding only a terrified coward in care of the flock, the Wolf left few
of them uninjured.




THE FISHERMAN AND THE LITTLE FISH


ALL day long a Fisherman had been toiling and had caught nothing.

“I will make one more effort,” thought he, “and then I must go home.”

He threw in his line, and soon drew up a very small perch.

The little Fish was terribly frightened when he found himself out of
water, and with a sharp hook sticking in his mouth; and he said to the
Fisherman:

“O sir, take pity upon me, and throw me into the water again! See what
a little thing I am. I should not make one mouthful for you now; but
if you leave me in the water, I shall grow large and stout, and then I
shall be worth catching. You can make a dinner of me then, or sell me
for a good price.”

“Ah!” said the Fisherman, “it is true you are small, but I have you
safely now. If I should throw you back, I might never catch you again.
You are better than nothing. I will keep you”; and he put the little
Fish into his basket, and took him home with him.




THE FOX AND THE CROW


A CROW stole a piece of cheese one day, and flew with it up into a
tree, so as to eat it at her leisure.

As she sat there, holding it in her beak, a Fox chanced to pass by, and
looking up saw her. “How good that cheese smells!” thought he; “I’ll
have it, sure as I’m a Fox.”

Coming close to the tree, he said, “My dear Madam, what a beautiful
creature you are! I was not aware till this moment what rare beauty
your family possesses. What eyes! What glossy feathers! What grace of
form! Is your voice as charming to hear, as your person is to look
upon? If it is, you well deserve to be called the Queen of Birds. Will
you not do me the favor to sing to me?”

Now it is well known that the Caw! Caw! of the Crow family is not
musical. She ought to have been on her guard, but so delighted was she
with the flattery of the Fox that she forgot to be wary. She opened her
mouth to show the Fox the sweetness of her voice, when—down fell the
bit of cheese, which was exactly what was expected.

The Fox ate it at one mouthful, then stopped to say, “Thank you, madam.
I am quite satisfied. Your voice is well enough, I have no doubt. What
a pity it is you are so sadly wanting in wit!”

       *       *       *       *       *

The Crow learned that we do well to be on our guard when people flatter
us.




THE PARTRIDGE AND THE FOWLER


A FOWLER caught a Partridge, and was just going to kill it.

“Wait a moment,” said the Partridge; “don’t kill me.”

“Why not?” said the Fowler.

“Because I like to live,” said the Partridge; “and, besides, if you let
me go, I will bring some of my friends and neighbors here, and you can
catch them, and that will be better than only one poor bird.”

“You are willing, then, that your friends and neighbors should die, to
save your own life?” said the Fowler. “Wicked Partridge! you have lived
long enough.” And he killed it.




THE THIRSTY PIGEON


A PIGEON who was very thirsty saw a goblet of water painted on a
signboard.

Without stopping to see what it was, she flew to it with a loud whir,
and dashing against the signboard, jarred herself terribly. Having
broken her wings, she fell to the ground, and was caught by a man, who
said, “Your zeal should never outrun your caution.”




THE THREE TRADESMEN


A GREAT city was once besieged, and all its inhabitants were gathered
together to consider by what means it might be protected from the
enemy.

A Bricklayer earnestly recommended bricks as the best materials for
successful defense.

A Carpenter with equal energy proposed timber as a preferable means of
defense.

Hearing which, a Currier stood up and said, “Sirs, I differ with you
wholly. There is no material for resistance equal to a covering of
hides, and nothing in the present case so good as leather.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Every man for his own trade.




THE HARES AND THE FROGS


IN A FOREST, deep, shady, and still, there once lived a company of
Hares.

Whenever a leaf fell rustling to the ground, or a squirrel, jumping in
the branches, broke a twig, the Hares started and trembled, they were
so timid.

One day there came a great wind, rushing through the tops of the trees
with a roaring noise, and waving the branches back and forth.

It frightened the Hares so much that they all started together, running
as fast as they could to get out of the forest, which had been their
home.

“What a sad state is ours,” they said, “never to eat in comfort, to
sleep always in fear, to be startled by a shadow, and fly with beating
heart at the rustling of the leaves. Better death, by far. Let us drown
ourselves in yonder lake.”

But when they came to the lake, it happened that there were scores
of frogs sporting on the banks; who, when they heard the sound of
footsteps, jumped into the water.

The timid Hares were startled by the splash; but, as they saw the frogs
dive to the bottom of the lake, a wise old Hare said, “Stop a moment!
let us consider. Here are creatures that are more timid than we—they
are afraid even of us. See, they are drowning themselves for fear of
us! It may not be so bad with us as we thought. Perhaps we have been
foolish, as foolish as the frogs, who are alarmed when there is no
danger. Let us make the best of our lot, and try to be brave in it.” So
back they went again to the forest.




THE EAGLE AND THE ARROW


A MOST rapacious Eagle had his eyrie on a lofty rock. Sitting there, he
could watch the movements of the animals he wished to make his prey,
and, waiting his opportunity, seize them and bear them away.

The poor creatures had no protection from such a foe. But an archer saw
him one day watching, from his place of concealment, the movements of
an unsuspicious hare; and, taking aim, he wounded him mortally.

The Eagle gave one look at the Arrow that had entered his heart, and
saw that its feathers had been furnished by himself, when descending to
secure prey.



“Ah!” said the Eagle, “it is indeed a double grief that I should perish
by an Arrow feathered from my own wing.”




THE EAGLE AND THE FOX


ONE day a mother Eagle came flying out of her nest to look for food for
her babies. She circled round and round, far up in the air, looking
down upon the earth with her keen eyes.

By and by she saw a little baby Fox, whose mother had left it alone
while, like the Eagle, she went for food.

Down came the bird, whir went her wings, and away she soared again,
with the little Fox clutched fast in her claws.

The poor mother Fox just at that moment came running home to her child,
and saw it being carried away.

“O Eagle!” she cried, “leave me my one little baby. Remember your own
children, and how you would feel if one of them should be taken away.
Oh, bring back my poor cub!”

But the cruel Eagle, thinking that the Fox could never reach her, in
her nest high in the pine tree, flew away with the little Fox, and left
the poor mother to cry.

But the mother Fox did not stop to cry long. She ran to a fire that was
burning in the field, caught up a blazing stick of wood, and ran with
it in her mouth to the pine tree where the Eagle had her nest.

The Eagle saw her coming, and knew that the Fox would soon have the
tree on fire, and that all her young ones would be burned. So, to save
her own brood, she begged the Fox to stop, and brought her back her
little one, safe and sound.




THE DRUM AND THE VASE OF SWEET HERBS


A DRUM once boasted to a Vase of Sweet Herbs in this way: “Listen to
me! My voice is loud and can be heard far off. I stir the hearts of
men so that when they hear my bold roaring they march out bravely to
battle.”

The Vase spoke no words, but gave out a fine, sweet perfume, which
filled the air and seemed to say: “I cannot speak, and it is not well
to be proud, but I am full of good things that are hidden within me,
and that gladly come forth to give cheer and comfort. People are drawn
to me in their need, and they remember me afterward with gratitude. But
you have nothing in you but noise, and you must be struck to make you
give that out. I would not boast so much if I were you.”




THE TWO FROGS


ONCE there were two Frogs who were dear friends.

One lived in a deep pond in the woods, where the trees hung over the
water, and where no one came to disturb him.

The other lived in a small pool. This was not a good place for a Frog,
or any one else, to live in, for the country road passed through the
pool, and all the horses and wagons had to go that way, so that it was
not quiet like the pond, and the horses made the water muddy and foul.

One day the Frog from the pond said to the other, “Do come and live
with me; I have plenty of food and water, and nothing to disturb me;
and it is so pleasant in my pond. Now here there is very little food,
and not much water, and the road passes through your pool, so that you
must always be afraid of passers-by.”

“Thank you,” said the other Frog; “you are very kind, but I am quite
content here. There is water enough; those who pass never trouble me;
and as to food, I had a good dinner day before yesterday. I am used to
this place, you know, and do not like change. But come and see me as
often as you can.”

The next time the Frog from the pond came to visit his friend, he could
not find him.

“Too late!” sang a Bird, who lived in a tree that overhung the pool.

“What do you mean?” said the Frog.

“Dead and gone!” said the Bird. “Run over by a wagon and killed, two
days ago, and a big Hawk came and carried him off.”

“Alas! if he had only taken my advice, he might have been well and
happy now,” said the Frog, as he turned sadly towards home; “but he
would have his way, and I have lost my friend.”




THE LION AND THE MOUSE


IT ONCE happened that a hungry Lion woke to find a Mouse just under his
paw. He caught the tiny creature, and was about to make a mouthful of
him, when the little fellow looked up, and began to beg for his life.

In most piteous tones the Mouse said: “Do not eat me. I meant no harm
coming so near you. If you would only spare my life now, O Lion, I
would be sure to repay you!”

The Lion laughed scornfully at this, but it amused him so much that he
lifted his paw and let his brave little prisoner go free.

It befell the great Lion, not long afterward, to be in as evil a case
as had been the helpless Mouse. And it came about that his life was to
be saved by the keeping of the promise he had ridiculed.

He was caught by some hunters, who bound him with a strong rope, while
they went away to find means for killing him.

Hearing his loud groans, the Mouse came promptly to his rescue, and
gnawed the great rope till the royal captive could set himself free.

“You laughed,” the little Mouse said, “at the idea of my being able to
be of service to you. You little thought I should repay you. But you
see it has come to pass that you are as grateful to me as I was once to
you. The weak have their place in the world as truly as the strong.”




THE MOUSE, THE CAT, AND THE COCK


A YOUNG Mouse, that had not seen much of the world, came home one day
and said: “O mother! I have had such a fright! I saw a great creature
strutting about on two legs. I wonder what it was! On his head was a
red cap. His eyes were fierce and stared at me, and he had a sharp
mouth.

“All at once he stretched his long neck, and opened his mouth so wide,
and roared so loud, that I thought he was going to eat me up, and I
ran home as fast as I could. I was sorry that I met him, for I had
just seen a lovely animal, greater even than he, and would have made
friends with her. She had soft fur like ours, only it was gray and
white. Her eyes were mild and sleepy, and she looked at me very gently
and waved her long tail from side to side. I thought she wished to
speak to me, and I would have gone near her, but that dreadful thing
began to roar, and I ran away.”

“My dear child,” said the mother, “you did well to run away. The fierce
thing you speak of would have done you no harm. It was a harmless Cock.
But that soft, pretty thing was the Cat, and she would have eaten you
up in a minute, for she is the worst enemy you have in the whole world.
Appearances are not always to be trusted.”




THE AX AND THE TREES


ONCE upon a time a man came to a forest to ask the Trees if they would
give him some wood to make a handle for his Ax.

The Trees thought this was very little to ask of them, and they gave
him a good piece of hard wood. But as soon as the man had fitted the
handle to his Ax, he went to work to chop down all the best Trees in
the forest.

As they fell groaning and crashing to the ground, they said mournfully
one to another, “Our kindness was misplaced. We suffer for our own
foolishness.”




THE JACKDAW AND THE SHEEP


A JACKDAW sat chattering upon the back of a Sheep.

“Peace, I pray you, noisy bird,” said the Sheep. “You are wearing my
life out If I were a dog, you would not think of serving me so.”

“That is true,” replied the Jackdaw; “you are right. I never meddle
with the surly and revengeful; but I love to plague gentle, helpless
creatures like you, that can not do me any harm in return.”

“I wonder if all cowards are not like the Jackdaw,” mused the Sheep, as
it went on contentedly browsing on the hillside.




THE CAT AND THE COCK


A HUNGRY Cat, who had tried in vain to find a Mouse for her supper, at
last caught a young Cock.

“You are a noisy creature,” she said to him, “and have lived long
enough. You disturb every one in the house by your loud crowing in the
morning.”

“You are mistaken,” answered the Cock; “I disturb no one. I crow to
wake the family. They would not know when to get up but for me.”

“Never mind,” said the Cat; “don’t trouble yourself to make excuses; I
have had no breakfast and no dinner; I shall eat you for my supper.”




THE WOLF AND THE GOAT


A WOLF saw a Goat feeding at the top of a steep precipice, where he
could not reach her.

“My dear friend,” said the Wolf, “be careful! I am afraid you will fall
and break your neck. Do come down to the meadow, where the grass is
fresh and green.”

“Are you very hungry?” said the Goat. “And is it your dinner time? And
would you like to eat me? I think I will not go down to the meadow
to-day, thank you.”

And she capered contentedly about on the edge of the rock, as safe from
falling as she was from the greedy Wolf with his false care for her.






THE HEN AND THE SWALLOW


A HEN who had no nest of her own found some eggs, and, in the kindness
of her heart, thought she would take care of them, and keep them warm.

But they were the eggs of a viper; and by and by the little snakes
began to come out of the shell.

A Swallow, who was passing, stopped to look at them.

“What a foolish creature you were, to hatch those eggs!” said the
Swallow. “Don’t you know that as soon as the little snakes grow big
enough, they will bite some one—probably _you_ first of all?”

“Then,” said the Hen, as she stood on one leg and looked at the ugly
little snakes, first with one eye and then with the other, “you think
I have done more harm than good?”

“I certainly do,” said the Swallow, as she flew away. “Good judgment is
better than thoughtless kindness.”




STONE BROTH


ONE very stormy day a Poor Man came to a rich man’s house to beg.

“Away with you!” said the servants; “do not come here troubling us.”

Then said the Man, “Only let me come in and dry my clothes at your
fire.” This, the servants thought, would not cost them anything; so
they let him come in.

The Poor Man then asked the cook to let him have a pan, so that he
could make some stone broth.

“Stone broth!” said the cook. “I should like to see how you can make
broth out of a stone”; so she gave him a pan. The Man filled it with
water from the pump, and then put into it a stone from the road. “But
you must have some salt,” said the cook.

“Do you think so?” courteously replied the stranger. She gave him the
salt, and before long she added some peas, some mint, and thyme. At
last she brought him all the scraps of meat she could find, so that the
Poor Man’s broth made him a good dinner.

“You see,” said the Man, “that if you only try long enough, and are
cheerful, making the best of what you have, you may at last get what
you want.”




THE MULE AND THE GRASSHOPPERS


A MULE, hearing some Grasshoppers chirping, was much pleased with the
sound, and wished that he could make such sweet music.

“What sort of food do you eat,” said he to the Grasshoppers, “that your
voices are so charming?”

The Grasshoppers replied, “We live upon dew.”

The Mule then decided that he too would live upon dew. And in a short
time he died of hunger, just from trying to do what he saw others
doing, without first learning their reason for it.




THE GNAT AND THE BULL


A GNAT, who had flown about until he was tired, sat down to rest on the
horn of a Bull.

After sitting there a long time, he thought he would go home. So he
made a loud buzzing noise and said to the Bull, “Would you like to have
me stay longer, or shall I go now?”

“Just as you please,” said the Bull. “I did not know when you came, and
I am sure I shall not miss you when you go away.”

“What an amount of self-importance for such a tiny creature,” thought
the sleepy Bull.




A FOX AND A CRAB


A HUNGRY Fox surprised a Crab, who had left the sea and was lying upon
the beach.

“What good luck, to find a breakfast so easily,” said the Fox, as he
pounced upon him.

“Well,” said the Crab, when he found that he was to be eaten, “this
comes of going where I have no business; I should have stayed in the
water, where I belonged.”




THE DONKEY AND THE FROGS


A DONKEY was one day walking through a pond, with a load of wood on his
back, when his foot slipped and he fell.

“Help, help!” cried the poor Donkey, as he struggled and kicked in the
water. But his load was so heavy that he could not rise, and he groaned
aloud.

The Frogs heard his groans but showed no pity. “What a foolish fellow,”
said they, “to make such a fuss about a little fall into the water.
What would you say if you had to live here always, as we do?”




THE NURSE AND THE WOLF


A WOLF, prowling about to find something for supper, heard a Child
crying in a house. Listening, he heard the Nurse say, “Stop crying this
minute, or I will throw you out of doors to the Wolf.”

The Wolf sat down near the door, thinking within himself, “I shall soon
have a good supper.”

The Baby cried and cried, till at last it went to sleep; and then the
Wolf heard the Nurse say: “There, that’s a good Baby. If the naughty
old Wolf comes for my darling, we’ll beat him, so we will.”

The Wolf trotted sadly home. On his way he met the Fox.

“What makes you look so sour and so forlorn, my friend?” said the Fox.

“Don’t speak to me!” growled the Wolf. “I have lost my supper just
because I believed what a Nurse said to a Baby.”




THE CAT AND THE MARTINS


A CAT, hearing that some Birds who lived in a martin box near by were
ill, put on his spectacles and his overcoat, and made himself look as
much as possible like a doctor, and went and knocked at their door.

“I hear that you are all sick,” said he, “and have come to call on you.
Let me in, and I will give you some medicine and cure you.”

“No, thank you,” said the Birds, who saw his whiskers and knew he was
their enemy the Cat; “we are well enough—much better than if we should
open our door and let you in.”




THE COCK AND THE FOX


A FOX went prowling about a farmyard, not seeing a trap which the
farmer had hidden there to catch him. Snap! went the trap, and the Fox
found himself held fast by a strong cord. He howled horribly and was
almost beside himself with rage.

A Cock, hearing the noise, flew to the top of the fence. Looking over,
he saw the Fox and was terribly frightened—not daring to go near him,
even when he found that his old enemy could not move. But he could not
refrain from giving an exulting crow.

The Fox, looking up, said: “Dear Mr. Cock, you see how unlucky I have
been, and all because I came here to inquire after your health. Do
please help me to break this string, or at least do not let any one
know that I am caught until I have time to gnaw it with my teeth.”

The Cock said nothing, but went as fast as he could and told his master
all about it. So the crafty Fox was served as the Cock thought he
deserved to be.




THE HORSE AND HIS RIDER


A CAVALRY officer took the greatest of pains with his charger. As long
as the war lasted, the Horse was looked upon as a companion and fellow
helper. He was carefully groomed every day, and fed with hay and oats.

But when the war was over, the allowance of grain and hay ceased, and
the Horse was fed with chaff and whatever he might find by the wayside.
He was made a drudge too, and was often forced to carry loads much too
heavy for his strength.

When, in course of time, war was again proclaimed, the soldier brought
his military trappings and put them on his charger; and, after having
arrayed his own person with his heavy coat of mail, he mounted to ride
to battle.

But the Horse, no longer equal to the burden, fell down straightway
under the weight.

“You must go to the war on foot,” he said to his master, “for you have
transformed me from a horse into an ass.”

He who slights his friends when he does not need their best offices
must not expect them to serve him when he needs them again.




THE FOX AND THE STORK


THE Fox and the Stork were on what seemed to be friendly terms. The
Fox invited the Stork to a dinner for which nothing was provided but a
soup, which was served on a wide, shallow dish.

The Fox presided at the feast with great dignity, and, as if to set
his friend an example, proceeded to lap the soup. This _he_ could do
with the greatest ease; but the Stork, who could only dip the tip of
his bill in the dish and get the tempting odor, fared badly. He praised
the dinner, but soon took leave, saying to his friend that he should do
himself the honor to return the compliment.

This he did in a few days, but ordered that nothing be brought to the
table but some minced meat in a glass jar, the neck of which was so
narrow and deep that, though he himself could eat very well, the Fox
could not reach it, and so could only lick the brim for the bits that
clung to it.

Reynard could not conceal his vexation, but was obliged to own that he
had been rightly used.

They who practice cunning must expect to suffer by it, and he laughs
best who laughs last.




THE DOG, THE COCK, AND THE FOX


A DOG and a Cock, who were neighbors, once made a little journey
together.

When night came on, the Cock flew up into the branches of a tree to
sleep; and the Dog found a hollow in the trunk, into which he could
creep and lie down. They slept well, and as soon as the morning dawned,
the Cock, as usual, began to crow.

A Fox, hearing the sound and thinking he was sure of a good breakfast,
came and stood under the branches. “Good morning,” said he to the Cock.

“How glad I am to make the acquaintance of the owner of such a voice!
Will you not come down here where we can chat a little?”

“Thank you, I cannot just yet,” replied the Cock; “but if you would
like to come up here, go around the tree trunk, and wake my servant. He
will open the door and let you in.”

The Fox did as he was requested; but as he approached the tree, the Dog
sprang upon him, and tore him to pieces.

“Two can play at the same game,” said the Cock, as he looked down upon
the scene.






THE FLY AND THE MOTH


A FLY alighted one night upon a pot of honey, and finding it very much
to his taste, began to eat it along the edges.

Little by little, however, he had soon crept away from the edge and
into the jar, until at last he found himself stuck fast. His legs and
wings had become so smeared with the honey that he could not use them.

Just then a Moth flew by, and seeing him struggling there, said: “Oh,
you foolish Fly! Were you so greedy as to be caught like that? Your
appetite was too much for you.”

The poor Fly had nothing to say in reply. What the Moth said was true.
But by and by, when evening came, he saw the Moth flying round a
lighted candle in the giddiest way, and each time a little closer to
the flame, until at last he flew straight into it and was burned.

“What!” said the Fly, “are you foolish, too? You found fault with me
for being too fond of honey; yet all your wisdom did not keep you from
playing with fire.” It is sometimes easier to see the foolishness of
others than to detect our own.




THE BOY BATHING


A LITTLE Boy once went in bathing where the water was too deep for him.
When he found himself sinking, he cried out to a Man who was passing
by, to come and help him.

“Can’t you swim?” asked the Man.

“No,” replied the Boy, “I don’t know how.”

“How foolish you were, then,” said the Man, “to go into deep water!
Didn’t you know better?”

“Oh, good sir, please help me now, or I shall drown!” cried the Boy.
“You can scold me when I am safe on shore again.”




THE HARE AND THE TORTOISE


A HARE one day made himself merry over the slow pace of the Tortoise,
vainly boasting of his own great speed in running.

The Tortoise took the laughing and boasting in good part. “Let us try a
race,” she said; “I will run with you five miles for five dollars, and
the Fox out yonder shall be the judge.”

The Hare agreed, a course was arranged, and away they started together.
True to his boasting the Hare was out of sight in a moment.

The Tortoise never for a moment stopped, but jogged along with a slow,
steady pace, straight to the end of the course. Full of sport, the Hare
first outran the Tortoise, then fell behind. Having come midway to the
goal, he began to nibble at the young herbage, and to amuse himself in
many ways. After a while, the day being warm, he lay down for a nap,
saying: “She is behind me now. If she should go by, I can easily enough
catch up.”

When the Hare awoke, the Tortoise was not in sight; and running as fast
as he could, he found her comfortably dozing at their goal.

Those who are very quick are apt to be too sure. Slow and steady often
wins the race.




THE ARAB AND HIS CAMEL


AS AN Arab sat in his tent one cold night, he saw the curtain gently
lifted, and the face of his Camel looking in.

“What is it?” he asked kindly.

“It is cold, master,” said the Camel; “suffer me, I pray thee, to hold
my head within the tent.”

“By all means,” replied the hospitable Arab; and the Camel stood with
his head inside the tent.

“Might I also warm my neck a little?” he entreated after a moment.

The Arab readily consented, and the Camel’s neck was thrust within the
tent.

He stood, moving his head from side to side uneasily, and presently
said: “It is awkward standing thus. It would take but little more room
if I were to place my forelegs inside the tent.”

“You may place your forelegs within the tent,” said the Arab. And now
he had to move a little to make room, for the tent was small.

The Camel spoke again: “I keep the tent open by standing thus, and make
it cold for us both. May I not stand wholly within?”

“Yes,” said the Arab, whose compassion included his beast as well as
himself; “come in wholly if you wish.” But now the tent proved to be
too small to hold both.

“I think, after all,” said the Camel, as he crowded himself in, “that
there will not be room here for us both. You are the smaller; it will
be best for you to stand outside. There will be room then for me.” So
he pushed a little, and the Arab with all haste went outside the tent.




THE FOX WHO HAD LOST HIS TAIL


A FOX was once caught in a trap by his tail. He succeeded in getting
away, but was forced to leave his “brush” behind. He soon realized that
his life would be a burden, from the shame and ridicule to which his
tailless condition would expose him.

“I must not own that it is a misfortune not to have a bushy tail,” he
said to himself.

So he set about to induce all the other Foxes to part with theirs. At
the next assembly he boldly made a speech, in which he set forth the
advantages of his present state.

“The tail,” he said, “is no real part of our persons, and besides being
very ugly to see, it exposes us to danger from the dogs. I have never
moved about with such ease as since I gave up my own.”

When he had ended his speech, a sly old Fox arose, and giving his own
brush a graceful wave, said, with the kind of sneer which all Foxes
know so well how to give, that if he had lost by accident his own tail,
he should, without doubt, agree with his friend; but that, as the brush
was a fox’s chief ornament and distinction, until such a mishap should
occur as had befallen his friend, he should retain his own and should
advise the others to do the same. And the vote to retain the tails was
given by a wave of the brush. Yet many fashions have been set by Foxes
who have met with some such accident.




THE BOYS AND THE FROGS


SOME Boys, playing near a pond, saw a number of Frogs sporting in the
water.

“Let us see if we can hit them; it is great fun to make them dive,”
said one; and they all began to pelt them with stones.

At last, after several Frogs had been hit, one of them put his head up
out of the water, and said: “Pray stop, Boys. Throwing stones at us may
be great sport for you, but it is death to us. We have done you no
harm, and alas! you have already killed or wounded three of our family.”




THE SWALLOW AND THE OTHER BIRDS


A WISE Swallow, seeing a man sow seed in a field, went behind him and
picked up one of the seeds to see what it was.

She found that it was flax. “When this flax has grown,” she said to
herself, “the man will make it into linen thread and use it to make
nets for catching us Birds.”

So she went to all the Birds and told them what she had discovered,
begging them to come and help her eat up the flaxseed before it should
sprout. “This field,” she said, “is as much ours as it is his. And
while one of us can do but little, all working together can quickly
remove our danger.”

But the Birds would not listen to her. Not one of them could she
persuade to help her pick up the seeds which the farmer had sown.

By and by the flax sprang up, and the Swallow tried again to persuade
the Birds to pull the young flax before it grew large. But they all
made fun of her caution and let the flax keep growing.

When she saw how heedless all the Birds were, the Swallow would have
nothing more to do with them, but left the woods where they lived and
came among men, building her nests in barns and along the eaves of
houses.




THE FARMER AND THE SNAKE


ONE wintry day a Farmer found a Snake lying on the frozen ground, quite
stiff and nearly dead with cold.

In a fit of compassion the Farmer brought him carefully to his house,
and laid him near the fire. But as soon as the Snake began to feel the
pleasant warmth, he raised his head and tried to bite his kind friend.

“Oh!” said the Farmer, “is that the way you repay me for my trouble?
You are a venomous creature, I am sure, and the sooner you die the
better.” And he killed him with one blow of his stick.




THE RAVEN AND THE SWAN


A RAVEN saw a snowy Swan floating on the lake.

“No wonder the Swan is so white,” thought the Raven, as he looked at
his own black feathers. “I dare say _I_ should be, if I were all the
time washing myself. I believe I’ll try it.”

Then he left his home, where he always found plenty to eat, and came
and lived by the lake. He washed himself from morning till night, but
he grew no whiter; and, as he found nothing to eat, he came near dying
for want of food.




THE BIRDS, THE BEASTS, AND THE BAT


THERE was once a big battle between the Birds and the Beasts.
Hesitating as to which to join, the Bat kept away from the contest and
looked on till he thought the Beasts would win the day.

Then he went among them. When they saw him, they said, “But you are a
Bird.”

“No, indeed,” said the Bat. “Look at my body covered with hair and at
my mouth with its sharp teeth.”

After a while, as the fight went on, the Birds began to have the best
of it, and then away flew the Bat to their side. “What Beast comes
here?” said the Birds.

“I am not a Beast,” said the Bat; “I am a Bird. Look at my wings. This
is my battle as truly as it is yours.”

But the Birds would have nothing to do with him. And to this day the
Bat seems ashamed to show himself in the daytime but hides in lonely
places, away from all other creatures, and only flits about noiselessly
in the dark, when both Birds and Beasts are asleep.




THE MAN, HIS SON, AND HIS DONKEY


A MAN and his Son were once driving their Donkey along a country road,
to sell him at the fair. They soon passed some girls, who were drawing
water at a well.

“Look,” said one of the girls; “see those silly people trudging along
in the dust, while their Donkey walks at his ease.”

The Man heard what they said, and put his boy on the Donkey’s back.
They had not gone far before they came to some old men.

“See here, now,” said one of them to the others, “this shows that what
I said is true. Nowadays the young take no care of the old. See this
boy riding while his poor old father has to walk by his side.”

Hearing this, the Man told his Son to get down, and he mounted the
Donkey himself. In a little while they met three women with children in
their arms.

“For shame!” said the women. “How can you let that poor boy walk when
he looks so tired, and you ride like a king?”

The Man then took the boy up behind him on the saddle, and they rode on
to the town. Just before they got there, some young men stopped them
and said:

“Is that Donkey yours?”

“Yes,” said the Man.

“One would not think so,” said they, “by the way you load him. You look
more fit to carry him than he to carry you.”

So the Man and the boy got off, tied the Donkey’s legs with a rope,
fastened him to a pole, and, each taking one end of the pole, carried
him along, while every one they met laughed outright.

By and by they came to a bridge. Then the Donkey began to kick, and
breaking the rope, fell into the water and was drowned.

The old Man and his Son made their way home as best they could,
thinking to themselves, “When we try to please everybody, we please
nobody.”




THE COUNTRY MOUSE AND THE CITY MOUSE


A MOUSE from the city went on a visit to a friend in the country.

The Country Mouse, with many apologies, brought out the best that he
had and waited on his guest.

There was plenty of oatmeal and peas, a nice scrap of bacon, and even a
paring of cheese for dessert. While the guest was dining, the Country
Mouse, out of politeness, would eat none of these dainties, for fear
there should not be enough for both, but nibbled a piece of straw to
keep his guest company.

When the dinner was over, the City Mouse said: “Old friend, I thank you
for your courtesy, but I must have a plain talk with you. I do not see
how you can bear to live so poor a life in this little hole. Why not
come with me to the city, where you will have all sorts of good things
to eat and a gay time? You are wasting your life. When you have once
seen the city you will never be willing to return to this quiet place.”



After being urged a long time, the Country Mouse at last agreed to go
to the city that very night. So they started off together, and about
midnight came to the great house where the City Mouse lived. In the
dining room was spread a rich feast; and the City Mouse, with many
airs and graces, ran about the table, and, picking out the nicest bits,
waited upon his country friend, who, amazed at the good things, ate to
his heart’s content.

All at once the doors of the dining room were flung open, and in came a
crowd of people, followed by a big dog, who barked loudly and ran about
the room.

The Mice rushed for the hole, to escape, and the little field Mouse
almost died of fright. As soon as he was able to speak, he said:

“Well! if this is city life, I have seen enough of it. Stay in this
fine place if you like. I shall be only too glad to get home to my
quiet, safer, country house and my plain oatmeal and peas.”




THE COCK AND THE JEWEL


“COME, my dears,” said a Cock to his hens one morning; “I am hungry,
and so are you. Let us go out. I will scratch up some nice worms and
beetles for our breakfast.”

The hens stood waiting while he scratched.

But the first thing that he found was neither a beetle nor a worm but a
precious stone. It may have been a ruby or an emerald.

“Dear me!” said the Cock; “what is this? a Jewel! How glad anybody
else might be to have found such a prize; but I have no need of it. I
would rather have a few kernels of good corn than all the Jewels in the
world.”

“And so would we,” said the hens. “Nothing can do us good if it is not
a thing that we ourselves want.”




THE OLD HOUND


ONCE there was a beautiful Hound. He had long, silky ears and a smooth,
bright skin; and he was not only beautiful but strong and swift, and
a faithful servant. Whenever his master went hunting, the Hound went
with him and chased the deer. After many years the Hound grew old and
feeble, but still he followed his master, with the other dogs.

One day a stag had been chased till it was almost tired out, and
the old Hound came up with it and seized it; but his teeth were old
and broken and could not hold fast, so that the stag gave a sudden
bound and got away. Just then the master rode up, and seeing what had
happened, was very angry. He took his whip to strike his faithful old
Hound.

“Hold! hold! O dear Master,” said he, “do not strike me. I meant to do
well. It is not my fault that I am old. Remember what I have been, if
you do not like me as I am now.”




THE VAIN JACKDAW


JUPITER having determined, it is said, to appoint a sovereign over
the birds, proclamation was made that on a certain day the candidates
should present themselves before him, and he would choose the most
beautiful to be king.

The Jackdaw, knowing his own ugliness, yet wishing to rule over the
birds, searched through woods and fields for feathers which had fallen
from the wings of his companions, and stuck them all over his body.

When the appointed day arrived, and the birds had assembled, the
Jackdaw made his appearance in his many-feathered finery, and Jupiter
proposed to make him king.

Upon seeing this, the other birds were indignant, and each plucking
from the Jackdaw his own kind of feathers, they left the proposed king
a plain Jackdaw with no claim to superior beauty.




THE DONKEY AND THE LAP DOG


THERE was once a man who had a Donkey and a little pet Dog. The Donkey
worked all day in the fields and slept in the barn at night.

But the Lap Dog frisked about and played, jumping in his master’s lap
whenever he pleased, feeding from his hand, and sleeping by his bed at
night.

The Donkey grumbled a great deal at this. “How hard I work!” said he,
“and I never get any pay but blows and hard words. Why should I not be
petted like that wretched little Dog? It may be partly my own fault.
Perhaps if I played with my master as he does, I too might be treated
like him.”

So the Donkey pushed his way into the house, and jumped up on his
master’s knee, putting his forefeet on his shoulders and giving a loud
bray.

The master, almost deafened by the noise and in danger from the great
clumsy creature, called out, “Help! help!” and the servants, running
in, drove the Donkey out of doors with sticks and stones.




THE ONE-EYED DOE


A DOE, blind in one eye, used to graze as near as she could to the edge
of a cliff, so that she might keep her blind eye to the water, while
with the other she kept watch against the approach of hunters or hounds
on the shore.



Some boatmen sailing by saw her standing thus on the edge of a cliff,
and finding that she did not perceive their approach, they came very
close, and taking aim, shot her.

Finding herself wounded, she said, “O unhappy creature that I am, to
take such care as I did against the dangers of the land, and then,
after all, to find this seashore, to which I had come for safety, so
much more perilous!”




THE CAMEL


WHEN man first beheld the Camel, he was so awed by his vast size that
he fled away from him in terror.

But after a time, perceiving the meekness and gentleness of the
animal’s temper, he summoned courage to approach him. The Camel so
readily obeyed the commands that were given him, and seemed so wanting
in spirit, that at last the man put a bridle in his mouth and set a
child to guide him.

Since then Camels are valued for the service they render.




THE WOLF AND THE HOUSE DOG


A WOLF met a Dog, and seeing that he looked fat and sleek, said to
him, “How does it happen, my friend, that you are so plump, while I,
although I run after game day and night, am half starved?”

“Why,” said the Dog, “I do not have to run after my food. I only guard
the house at night, and all the family pet me and feed me with scraps
from their own plates. Come and live with me, and you shall be as well
off as I am.”

“That I should like,” said the Wolf. “I will at least go with you and
try the life.”

As they trotted along the road together, the Wolf saw a mark on the
Dog’s neck, and asked him what it was.

“Oh, that is nothing,” said the Dog; “only a little mark made by the
fretting of my chain.”

“Do you wear a chain?” asked the Wolf; “and do you mean to say that you
are tied up?”

“Why, yes,” said the Dog; “they tie me in the daytime, but at night I
can go where I please. It is a bit annoying at first, but one soon gets
used to it.”

“Good-by,” said the Wolf; “that is enough for me. Though I may not be
fat, I will at least be free.”




THE OAK AND THE REED


ON THE bank of a river grew a tall Oak Tree. It stood with its roots
firm in the ground, and its head high in the air, and said to itself:
“How strong I am! Nothing shall make me bow. I look down upon all the
other trees.”

But one day there was a storm. The terrible unseen wind came and struck
the proud Oak. Crash! went the trunk, down came all the beautiful
branches, and the Tree fell into the river. As the water carried it
away, it passed a Reed that grew on the bank. The little Reed stood up
tall and slender, and looked at the poor broken Tree.

“O Reed,” said the Tree, “how did it happen that you were not broken
down and spoiled when the wind came? You are so little and weak, and I
was so strong and proud.”

“Ah, poor Tree!” said the Reed, “that is just the reason that the wind
did not hurt me. I bent low until it had gone by, but you stood stiff
and tried to stop it on its way. No one can stop the wind. It must go
where it is sent, but it will not hurt those who are not proud and
stubborn.”




THE DOG AND THE HARE


A DOG once gave chase to a Hare. Having not long since made a good
meal, the Dog was not hungry, and so was not in haste to end the sport
by killing the Hare.



At times he would snap at his prey, and at times play with him and
lick him with his tongue, till at last the bewildered Hare cried:

“Pray tell me, are you an enemy or a friend? If a friend, why do you
bite me so? and if an enemy, why do you caress me?”

No one can trust a person who is neither the one thing nor the other.




THE HAWK, KITE, AND PIGEONS


THE Pigeons, terrified by the frequent appearance of a Kite, asked the
Hawk to help them.

“You are the only bird of our acquaintance,” they said, “that can
protect us from our enemy. If you will take care of us, we shall feel
safe.”

The Hawk at once consented, and took up his abode in the dovecote. But
when the Pigeons had let him come in, they found that he slew more
of them in a single day than the Kite could possibly pounce upon in a
whole year.

The oldest, wisest pigeon among them said: “When we are in trouble,
we must not forget that there are other dangers than the ones we are
suffering from. There is a proverb among men that tells them to avoid a
remedy that is worse than the disease.”




THE WAR HORSE AND THE MULE


A WAR Horse, ready for battle, with his splendid saddle and jingling
bridle, came galloping swiftly along the highroad, his hoofs sounding
like thunder on the hard ground.

A poor old Mule, with a heavy load on his back, was going slowly down
the same road.

“Out of my way,” said the War Horse, “or I will trample you in the
dust!”

The poor Mule made room for him as fast as he could, and the Horse went
proudly on his way.

Not long after this the Horse was shot in the eye; and, as he was no
longer fit for the army, his fine saddle and bridle were taken off, and
he was sold to a farmer, who made him drag heavy loads.

Since he had not been trained to the work, it came hard to him, and he
complained bitterly.

The Mule, meeting him soon after, knew him and called out: “Aha! is it
you? I thought pride would have a fall some day.”




THE WIND AND THE SUN


THE North Wind and the Sun once fell into a dispute as to which was the
stronger of the two. They related their most famous exploits, and each
ended as he began, by thinking he had the greater power.

Just then a traveler came in sight, and they agreed to test the matter
by trying to see which of them could soonest make the traveler remove
his cloak.

The boastful North Wind was the first to try, the Sun meanwhile
watching behind a gray cloud. He blew a furious blast and nearly tore
the cloak from its fastenings; but the Man only held his cloak more
closely, and old Boreas spent his strength in vain.

Mortified by his failure to do so simple a thing, the Wind withdrew at
last in despair. “I don’t believe you can do it, either,” he said.

Then out came the kindly Sun in all his splendor, dispelling the clouds
that had gathered and sending his warmest rays down upon the traveler’s
head.

The Man looked up gratefully, but, growing faint with sudden heat, he
quickly flung aside his cloak, and hastened for comfort to the nearest
shade.

Persuasion is often better than force.




THE BEAR AND THE TWO TRAVELERS


TWO men were traveling together, when a Bear suddenly crossed their
path.

One of the men climbed quickly into a tree, and tried to conceal
himself in its branches.

Seeing that he must be attacked, the other one fell flat upon the
ground; and when the Bear came up, felt him with his snout, and smelt
him all over, the man held his breath, feigning death.

The Bear soon left him, for it is said a Bear will not touch a dead
body.

When the Bear had gone, the man in the tree came down to join his
companion, and, as a pleasant joke, inquired, “What was it that the
Bear whispered in your ear when he bent over you for so long?”

His friend replied very gravely: “He gave me this bit of advice, ‘Never
travel with a friend who deserts you at the approach of danger.’”




THE TWO GOATS


TWO Goats started at the same moment, from opposite ends, to cross a
rude bridge that was only wide enough for one to cross at a time.

Meeting at the middle of the bridge, neither would yield to the other.
They locked horns and fought for the right of way, until both fell into
the torrent below and were drowned.




THE BULL AND THE CALF


A BULL was once striving with all his might to squeeze himself through
a narrow passage which led to his stall.

“I will go through,” said a young Calf, “and show you the way. I have
done it many a time.”

“Save yourself the trouble,” said the Bull; “I knew the way before you
were born.”




THE FAWN AND HIS MOTHER


A YOUNG Fawn once said to his Mother: “I do not see, Mother, how it is
that you should be so afraid of the dogs. You are larger than a dog,
and swifter; and you are much more used to running. Why is it that the
mere mention of a hound puts you into such a terrible fright?”

The Mother smiled upon her brave young son. “I know very well,” she
said, “that all you say is true. I look at my long legs, and remember
all the advantages that you mention, yet when I hear the bark of but a
single dog, I faint with terror.”






THE MULE AND HIS SHADOW


ONE very hot day a Traveler hired a Mule with his driver to carry some
merchandise to a distant place.

The way lay across a sandy plain, and the day being intensely hot, the
Traveler called upon the driver to stop for rest. To escape from the
direct heat of the sun, which was shining in all its strength, the
Traveler proceeded to sit down in the shadow of the Mule.

But a violent dispute arose, for the shadow was sufficient for but one,
and the driver, a lusty fellow, rudely pushed the Traveler one side,
claiming the spot for himself, saying: “When you hired this Mule of me,
you said nothing about the shadow. If now you want that too, you must
pay for it.”

The discussion grew so violent that they forgot the Mule, who took
advantage of his freedom and ran away. And so, in disputing about the
shadow they lost the substance.




THE BLIND MAN AND THE LAME MAN


A BLIND Man, being stopped in a bad piece of road, met a Lame Man,
and entreated him to help him out of the difficulty into which he had
fallen.

“How can I,” replied the Lame Man, “since I can scarcely drag myself
along? I am lame, and you look very strong.”

“I am strong enough,” said the other. “I could go if I could but see
the way.”

“Oh, then we may help each other,” said the Lame Man. “If you will take
me on your shoulders, we will seek our fortunes together. I will be
eyes for you, and you shall be feet for me.”

“With all my heart,” said the Blind Man. “Let us render each other our
mutual services.” So he took his lame companion upon his back, and they
traveled on with safety and pleasure.




THE TWO POTS


A RIVER carried down, in its stream, two Pots, one made of Earthenware
and the other of Brass.

The Brass Pot was disposed to be social. “Since we must be companions,
let us be friendly,” he said. “In union is strength. Though we are
carried away against our will, it is of no use to repine. We may yet
see much good.”

But the Earthen Pot said: “I beg you not to come so near me. I am as
much afraid of you as of the river; for if you do but touch me ever so
slightly, I shall be sure to break. To be really social and friendly
people must have ways and needs in common.”




THE QUACK FROG


THERE was once a Frog who made proclamation that he was a learned
physician, able to heal all diseases.

He went so far as to tell the beasts that it was their own fault that
they were ill, since if they would but submit to his treatment, he
would restore them to perfect health.

A Fox, hearing it, asked: “How is it, since you can do such great
things for others, you do not first try to mend your own ugly gait and
your wrinkled skin? They who assume to help others should first improve
themselves.”




THE WOLF IN SHEEP’S CLOTHING


A WOLF once clothed himself in the fleece of a sheep, and being
mistaken for one of the flock, got into the fold. He had a chance to
make way with as many sheep as he liked; but his time for doing so
was short, for the Shepherd, coming into the fold during the night,
discovered him.

Tying him to a tree, he left him hanging there, still in his sheep’s
dress, as a warning to other wolves who might be prowling about.

Some shepherds who chanced to pass by saw him there, and stopped to
inquire why sheep should be thus served. As they came nearer and saw
that it was not a sheep but a Wolf, the Shepherd said, “This is the way
I serve a Wolf, even though I find him wearing the habit of a sheep.”




THE BOY AND THE FILBERTS


A BOY once thrust his hand into a pitcher nearly filled with Filberts.
He grasped as many as his hand could possibly hold; but when he tried
to draw out his closed fist, the narrowness of the neck prevented him
from doing so. Unwilling to lose his nuts, yet unable to get them by
drawing out his hand, he burst into tears and bitterly lamented his
hard fortune. A person standing by finally gave him this wise and
reasonable advice:

“Be satisfied to take half as many, my boy, and you will get them
easily.”




THE MISER


A MISER who had buried a lump of gold in the ground came to the spot
every day to look at it.

Finding one day that it had been stolen, he began to tear his hair and
lament loudly.

A neighbor, seeing him, said: “Pray do not grieve so. Bury a stone in
the same hole and fancy it is the gold. It will serve you just as well,
for when the gold was there you made no use of it.”




THE WIDOW AND HER LITTLE MAIDS


A WIDOW who had great reputation as a housekeeper, because she was so
fond of cleaning, was waited upon by two little Maids.

She herself was wakened before dawn by the crowing of the cock, and
would rise at once and call her Maids.

The Maids, who had no taste for such excessive tidiness, and who were
kept weary by such constant labor, held a spite against the poor cock
for rousing their mistress so early.

“If it were not for him,” they said, “the mistress would sleep till the
sun is well up. Let us kill the cock, since there is no other way to
stop his loud crowing.”

But the mistress, no longer hearing the cock, was unable to tell the
time, and so often woke her Maids in the middle of the night and set
them to work.




THE CHARCOAL BURNER AND THE FULLER


A CHARCOAL Burner carried on his trade at his own house. One day he met
a friend who was a Fuller, and begged him to come and live with him.

“We shall be far better friends if we live together,” he said, “and
then our housekeeping expenses will be greatly lessened.”

The Fuller replied: “The arrangement would not suit me in the least,
for whatever I should take pains to whiten, your charcoal would
immediately blacken. I am afraid we should not grow better friends
under such circumstances.”




THE PORCUPINE AND THE SNAKES


A PRICKLY Porcupine came wandering along one day, looking for a place
to live.

He found a family of Snakes in a warm cave, and asked them to let him
share their shelter.

The Snakes consented, though much against their will, and the Porcupine
crept into their home. But it was not long before they found that his
sharp quills stuck into them and hurt them, and they wished they had
never let him in.



“Dear Porcupine, please go away,” they said; “you are so large and so
prickly.”

But the Porcupine was very rude, and said: “Oh, no. If you do not like
it here, you can go away. I find it very comfortable.”

It was too late that the Snakes learned that it is easier to keep an
intruder out than to compel him to go when you have once let him in.




THE BUNDLE OF STICKS


AN Old Man had many Sons, who were often quarreling. He tried to make
them good friends, but could not. As the end of his life drew near, the
old Man called them all to him and showed them a bundle of sticks tied
tightly together.

“Now,” said the Father, “see if you can break this bundle of sticks.”

Each of the Sons in turn took the bundle and tried with all his might
to break it, but could not. When all had tried and given it up, the
Father said, “Untie the bundle, and each of you take a stick and see
if you can break that.” This they could do very easily. Then said the
Father:

“You saw when the sticks were bound together how strong they were; but
as soon as they were untied, you broke them easily. Now, if you will
stop quarreling and stand by each other, you will be like the bundle of
sticks—no one can do you any harm; but if you do not keep together, you
will be as weak as is one of the little sticks by itself, which any one
can break.”




THE MISCHIEVOUS DOG


THERE was once a Dog who used to run at every one whom he met, but so
quietly that no one suspected harm from him till he began to bite his
heels.

In order to give notice to strangers that the Dog could not be trusted,
and at the same time to punish the Dog himself, the master would
sometimes hang a bell about his neck and compel him to drag a heavy
clog, which he firmly attached to his collar by a chain.

For a time the Dog hung his head; but seeing that his bell and clog
brought him into notice, he grew proud of them, and ran about the
market place to display them and attract attention to himself. He even
went so far as to give himself airs with the other dogs, who had no
such mark of distinction.

An old Hound, seeing it, said: “Why do you make such an exhibition of
yourself, as if your bell and clog were marks of merit? They do indeed
bring you into notice; but when their meaning is understood, they are
marks of disgrace—a reminder that you are an ill-mannered cur. It is
one thing to be renowned when our virtues give occasion for it; it is
quite another to become notorious for our faults.”




THE DOG AND THE OYSTER


A DOG, seeing an Oyster, took it to be an egg and swallowed it. Soon
after, suffering great pain, he said, “It was my greedy haste that
brought me this torment.”




THE FOX AND THE LEOPARD


THE Fox and the Leopard once disputed who was the more beautiful. The
Leopard exhibited, one by one, the various spots which covered his
skin. The Fox, who was even more proud of his wits than of his person,
interrupted him at last by saying: “Yet when all is said, how much more
beautiful am I, who am decorated not simply in body but in mind. The
person should be of more value than his coat.”




THE DOGS AND THE HIDES


SOME Dogs, famished with hunger, saw cowhides steeping in a river,
close by a tannery, and thought they might be eaten. Not being able to
reach them, they set to work first to drink up the river, but burst
themselves with drinking long before they reached the hides.




THE WOODMAN AND THE TREES


A WOODMAN came into a forest, and made a petition to the Trees to
provide him a handle for his ax.

The Trees, honored by his civility, acceded to his request, and held a
consultation to decide which of them should be given him.

Without a dissenting voice, they chose the Ash, who, it seems, is not a
favorite among the Trees. Some of them were bold enough to say that bad
luck went with the Ash, and that at heart they were not bound to be in
sympathy with woodcutters.

The Woodman cut down the Tree, and fitted the handle to his ax; then to
the dismay of the Trees, set to work and, with strong strokes, quickly
felled all the noblest giants of the forest.

Lamenting too late the fate of his companions, an old Oak remarked to a
neighboring Cedar:

“The first step has lost us all. If we had not so willingly given up
the rights of the Ash, we might have stood for ages.”




THE MILKMAID AND HER PAIL OF MILK


DOLLY the Milkmaid having been a good girl and careful in her work, her
mistress gave her a pail of new milk for herself.

With the pail upon her head, Dolly tripped gayly along on her way to
the town, whither she was going to sell her milk.

“For this milk,” said Dolly, “I shall get a shilling, and with it I
will buy twenty of the eggs laid by our neighbor’s fine fowls. The
mistress will surely lend me a hen, and, allowing for all mishaps, I
shall raise a good dozen of chicks. They will be well grown before the
next fair-time comes around, and it is then that chickens bring the
highest price. I shall be able to sell mine for a guinea.

“Then I shall buy that jacket that I saw in the village the other day,
and a hat and ribbons too. And when I go to the fair, how smart I shall
be!

“Robin will be there, and will come up and offer to be friends again.
But I won’t make up too easily; and when he wants me for a partner in
the dance, I shall just toss up my head and—”

Here Dolly gave her head the least bit of a toss, when down came the
pail, and all the milk was spilled upon the ground.

Poor Dolly! it was her good-by to eggs, chickens, jacket, hat, ribbons,
and all.




THE CAT AND THE FOX


THE Cat and the Fox were once talking together in the middle of the
forest.

“I do not care what happens,” said the Fox, “for I have a thousand
tricks, any one of which would get me out of difficulty. But pray, Mrs.
Puss,” he added, “what would you do if there should be an invasion?”



“I have but one course,” Puss replied. “If that would not serve me, I
should be undone.”

“I am sorry for you,” said the Fox. “I would gladly teach you one or
two of my tricks, but it is not wise to trust another. We must each
take care for himself.”

These words were hardly spoken, when a pack of hounds came upon them in
full cry.

The Cat, by means of her one well-proved safeguard, ran up a tree and
sat serenely among the branches. “This is my way,” she said to the Fox.
“What is yours to be?”

The Fox, with all his thousand tricks, was not able to get out of
sight, and fell a prey to the dogs.




THE MONKEY AND THE CAT


A MONKEY and a Cat lived in the same family, and it was hard to tell
which was the greater thief.

One day, as they were roaming together, they spied some chestnuts
roasting in the ashes of a fire.

“Come,” said the cunning Monkey, “we shall not go dinnerless to-day.
Your claws are better than mine for the purpose; pull the chestnuts out
of the ashes and you shall have half.”

Puss pulled them out, burning her paws very much in doing so. When she
had stolen every one, she turned to the Monkey for her share of the
booty; but, to her chagrin, she could find no chestnuts, for he had
eaten them all.




THE WOLF AND THE SHEPHERD


FOR a long time the Wolf had followed the Sheep without attempting to
injure one of them.

The Shepherd stood on his guard against him for a while, and kept
strict watch that he did not come too near. But as day after day passed
and the Wolf showed no disposition to injure any of the flock, he
allowed him to approach nearer, till at last he came among the Sheep,
and seemed to watch over them like a dog.

“He is really quite a help to me,” said the Shepherd to himself; “and
I have never seen him make the slightest effort to seize a sheep or a
lamb.”

So, having occasion to go to town one day, he left his flock in the
care of the Wolf, whom he regarded as a guardian over them.

But no sooner was the man gone, than the Wolf, seeing his opportunity,
fell upon the Sheep and destroyed the greater part of them.

“I have been rightly served,” said the Shepherd, on his return. “Why
did I not know better than to trust my Sheep to their worst enemy? Soon
or late, nature will show itself.”




THE WOLF, THE FOX, AND THE APE


A WOLF accused of theft a Fox, who utterly denied the charge, whereupon
an Ape undertook to adjudge the matter in question.

When each had fully stated his case, the Ape pronounced this sentence:

“I am fully satisfied that you, Wolf, never lost what you claim.” Then
turning to the Fox, he said, “And I believe you to have done that which
you so stoutly deny.”




THE BLIND MAN AND THE WHELP


A BLIND Man was accustomed to distinguish different animals by touching
them with his hands.

The whelp of a wolf was brought him, with the request that he should
feel it and tell what it was.

Being in doubt, he said, “I do not quite know whether it is the cub of
a fox or the whelp of a wolf; but this I know full well, that it would
not be safe to admit it to the sheepfold.”




THE SPENDTHRIFT AND THE SWALLOW


A YOUNG man who had been a great spendthrift, and had run through
all the money he had inherited, and even sold all his outer clothing
except his cloak, saw a Swallow skimming over the meadows in the early
springtime and twittering gayly. Believing that summer was really come,
he sold his cloak also.

The next day there happened to be a severe frost, and, shivering
himself, he found the Swallow lying frozen and stiff upon the ground.

“Unhappy bird,” he said, “had you not come before your time, I should
not now be so wretched, and you might have escaped your fate. A single
swallow does not make a summer.”




THE BOAR AND THE FOX


A BOAR stood whetting his tusks against a tree.

“What do you mean,” asked a Fox, “by such warlike preparation? There is
no enemy in sight.”

“When the enemy is in sight,” said the Boar, “it is time to think of
something else.”




HERCULES AND THE WAGONER


AS A WAGONER drove his wagon through a miry lane, the wheels stuck fast
in the clay, so that the horses could proceed no further.

The Man, without making the least effort to remedy the matter, fell
upon his knees and began to call upon Hercules to come and help him
out of his trouble.

“Lazy fellow,” said Hercules, “lay your own shoulder to the wheel. Stir
yourself and do what you can. Then, if you want aid from the gods,
you shall have it. Remember the proverb, Heaven helps those who help
themselves.”




THE MULES AND THE ROBBERS


TWO Mules, laden with packs, were trudging along the highway. One
carried panniers filled with money, the other sacks of grain.

The Mule that carried the treasure walked with head erect and stately
step, jingling the bells about his neck as he went.

His companion followed at a quiet, easy pace.

Suddenly a band of Robbers sprang upon them, attracted by the strong,
proud step and the jingling bells. The Mule that carried the gold made
so great an ado that the Robbers seized his pack, wounding him with
their weapons, and, hearing footsteps, fled.

“I am glad,” said the other, “that I was thought of so little
consequence, for I have lost nothing, nor am I hurt with any wound.”




THE SWALLOW AND THE CROW


THE Swallow and the Crow were once contending about their plumage.
The Crow finally put an end to the dispute by saying, “Your feathers
are well enough now while it is warm, but mine protect me against the
winter.”




JUPITER AND THE BEE


A BEE made Jupiter a present of a pot of honey, which was so kindly
taken that he bade her ask what she would in exchange.

The Bee, who was nursing a private spite for the loss of some of her
winter’s store, desired of Jupiter that wherever she should set her
sting it might be mortal.

Jupiter was loath to leave mankind at the mercy of a little spiteful
insect, and was annoyed at the ill nature shown in her wish. He said,
therefore, that while, for his promise’s sake, he would give her the
power to harm, she must be careful how she used the power, for where
she planted her sting, she would leave it, and would thereby risk her
own life.

Ill will often does greater harm to the one who acts from it than to
the one on whom it falls.




THE TWO TRAVELERS


AS TWO men were traveling through a wood, one of them took up an
ax which he saw lying upon the ground. “Look here,” said he to his
companion; “I have found an ax.”

“Don’t say _I_ have found it,” said the other, “but _we_. As we are
companions, we ought to share it between us.”

“No,” said the first, “I found the ax. It is mine.”

They had not gone far when they heard the owner of the ax pursuing
them, and calling out to them in great passion.

“We are in for it now,” said he who had the ax.

“Nay,” said the other; “say _I_ am in for it, not _we_. When you
thought you had a prize, you would not let me share it with you, and
now you cannot expect me to share in the danger.”




THE KID AND THE WOLF


A KID, mounted on a high rock where she felt safe, bestowed all manner
of abuse upon a Wolf on the ground below.

The Wolf replied: “Do not think, silly little creature, that you can
annoy me. This ill language that you are using I regard as coming, not
from you, but from the safe place on which you stand. You would be in a
different mood if you were down here by my side.”




THE GOURD AND THE PINE


A GOURD was once planted close beside a large and noble Pine Tree.
The season was kindly, and the Gourd shot itself up in a short time,
climbing by the boughs and twining about them, till it covered and
overtopped the Tree itself.

The leaves were so large and the flowers and fruit so fair that the
Gourd, comparing them with the slender needles of the Pine, had the
assurance to think itself of greater value in the comparison.

“Why,” said the Gourd, “you have been more years in growing to this
stature than I have been days.”

“That is true,” said the Pine; “but after the many winters and summers
that I have endured, the many blasting colds and parching heats, you
see me the very same that I was long years ago. Nothing has overcome
me. But when your race is put to the proof, the first blight or frost
is sure to bring down that pride of yours. In an hour you are stripped
of all your glory.”




THE HARE AND THE HOUND


A HOUND, having started a Hare which proved to be a capital runner, at
length gave up the chase. His master, seeing it, said, “The little one
is the best runner, eh?”

“Ah, Master,” answered the Dog, “it’s all very well to laugh; but you
do not see the difference between us. He was running for his life,
while I was only running for my dinner.”




THE OWL AND THE GRASSHOPPER


AN Owl, who was sitting in a hollow tree, dozing away a long summer
afternoon, was much disturbed by a rogue of a Grasshopper, singing in
the grass below.

So far from moving away at the request of the Owl, or keeping quiet,
the Grasshopper sang all the more, saying that honest people got their
sleep at night.



The Owl waited in silence for a while, and then artfully addressed the
Grasshopper thus: “I suppose I ought to be angry with you, my dear,
for I confess I would rather sleep than listen to your singing. But if
one cannot be allowed to sleep, it is something to be kept awake by
such a pleasant little pipe as yours. And now it occurs to me that I
have some delicious nectar with which to reward a musician who sings
so sweetly. If you will take the trouble to come up, you shall have a
drop. It will clear your voice nicely.”

The silly Grasshopper came hopping up to the Owl, who at once caught
and killed him, and so finished her nap in comfort.




THE MULE EATING THISTLES


A MULE, laden with choice provision of several sorts, was on his way
to the field. His master and the reapers were at work there, and the
provision that he carried was for the refreshment of both man and beast.

Seeing a large, strong thistle by the roadside, he stopped to eat it.
“Many people would wonder,” thought he, “that, with such dainty food
upon my back, I should have appetite for the despised thistle; but to
me the bitter, prickly weed has a more savory relish than anything
else in the world. Let others choose what they will, but give me a
fine, juicy thistle like this, and I shall be content. Every one to his
taste. It is wisely ordered that what one rejects should be the choice
of another. A wise man has said that a weed is a plant that people have
not yet found a use for.”




THE SICK STAG


A STAG, whose joints had become stiff with age, was at great pains
to gather an abundant supply of food—enough, as he thought, for the
remainder of his days.

He stretched himself beside it, in a quiet, sunny corner of his
pasture, and now dozing, now nibbling, was passing a happy old age.

He had been a favorite among his companions, and they now came often,
and in great numbers, to call upon him and wish him good luck. He made
them welcome in a hospitable manner, and each, as often as he came,
helped himself to a little of the food so abundantly provided.

The end of the matter was, that the poor Stag died, not so much from
either sickness or old age as from want of the food which his friends
had eaten for him. Before doing a thing, it is well sometimes to
consider, “What if every one should do it?”




THE WOLF AND THE SHEPHERDS


A WOLF, passing by, saw some Shepherds in a hut, eating for their
dinner a haunch of mutton. Approaching them, he said: “Ah! gentlemen,
you are feasting on mutton. I like your taste. But what a hue and cry
you would raise if _I_ were to do it.”




THE BOY AND THE NETTLE


A BOY was once stung by a Nettle. Crying with pain, he ran home and
told his mother, saying, “Although it pains me so much, I did but touch
it ever so gently, for I had been hurt by it before.”

“That was just it,” said his mother. “It was that which gave you so
bad a sting. The next time you have occasion to touch a Nettle, grasp
it boldly, with courage and resolution. It will be as soft as silk in
your hand and will not hurt you in the least. And you will meet many
persons, as well as things, that must be handled in the same way, if
you would escape discomfort from them.”




THE HARES AND THE FOXES


THE Hares waged war with the Eagles and called upon the Foxes to help
them.

The Foxes replied: “We would willingly have helped you, if we had not
known so well who you were and with whom you were fighting. Before we
can commit ourselves, we must count the cost.”




MERCURY AND THE WOODMAN


A WOODMAN, felling a tree by the side of a river, let his ax drop by
accident into the stream.

Being thus suddenly deprived of the tool by means of which he gained
his livelihood, he sat down upon the bank and lamented his hard fate.

To his surprise Mercury appeared and asked him what was the matter.
Having heard the story of the man’s misfortune, he dived to the bottom
of the river, and bringing up a golden ax, inquired if that was the one
he had lost.

On his saying that it was not his, Mercury dived a second time, and
returning with a silver ax in his hand, again demanded of the Woodman
if it was his.

This also the Woodman refused, saying that it was none of his. Mercury
disappeared a third time and brought up the ax that the man had lost.
This the poor man took with joy and thankfulness.

So pleased was Mercury with the honesty of the man, that he gave him
the other two axes in addition to his own.

The Woodman, on his return home, related to his companions all that had
happened. One of them resolved to see if he could secure the same good
fortune to himself.

He ran to the river and threw his ax in, then sat down upon the bank to
lament his sad fate.

Mercury appeared as before and demanded to know the cause of his grief.
After hearing the man’s account, he dived and brought up a golden ax
and asked the man if that was his.

Transported at the sight of the precious metal, the fellow eagerly
answered that it was, and greedily attempted to snatch it. The god,
detecting his falsehood and greed, not only declined to give him the
golden ax but refused to recover for him his own.




THE RAT AND THE ELEPHANT


A RAT, traveling on the highway, met a huge Elephant, bearing his royal
master and the master’s favorite dog, cat, parrot, and monkey. Behind
them came a retinue of servants and many courtiers.

An admiring crowd followed the great beast and his attendants, so that
the entire road was filled.

“How foolish you are,” said the Rat to the people, “to make such a fuss
at seeing an elephant. Is it his great bulk that you so much admire?
Mere size is nothing. At most it can only frighten little girls and
boys, and I can do that as well. I am a beast as well as he. I have as
many legs, and ears, and eyes. If you will take the trouble to compare
us, you will see that I have finer parts. What right, then, has he to
take up all the highway, which belongs to me as well as to him?”

At this moment, the Cat from her high place spied the Rat. She jumped
to the ground and soon convinced him that he was not an Elephant.




THE HUSBANDMAN AND THE STORK


A HUSBANDMAN pitched a net in his fields, to take the cranes and wild
geese that came daily to feed upon the newly sown corn.

In this net he captured several cranes and geese, and among them, on
one occasion, was a Stork. The cranes and geese accepted their lot as
one of the chances to which such lives as theirs were subject; but the
Stork was in very sad case and pleaded hard for his life.

Among other reasons why he should not be put to death, the Stork urged
that he was neither goose nor crane but a poor, harmless Stork, who
performed his duty to his parents as well as ever he could, feeding
them when they were old, and carrying them, when required, from place
to place upon his back.

“All this may be true,” replied the Husbandman; “but, as I have taken
you in bad company, and in the same crime, you must expect to suffer
the same punishment.”




THE SATYR AND THE TRAVELER


A SATYR, ranging in the forest in winter, once came across a Traveler
who was half starved and nearly frozen.

He took pity upon him and invited him to come to his cave for food and
shelter.

On their way, the Man kept blowing upon his fingers. “Why do you do
that?” said the Satyr, who had seen but little of the world of men.

“To warm my hands,” replied the Man; “they are nearly frozen.”

Arriving at the cave, the Satyr poured out a smoking mess of pottage
and set it before the Traveler, who eagerly seized it and began to blow
upon it with all his might.

“What, blowing again!” exclaimed the Satyr. “Is it not hot enough?”

“It is, indeed,” answered the Man; “that is the very reason why I am
blowing it. I want to cool it enough to be able to eat it.”

Upon this the Satyr exclaimed in alarm, “Be off with you! I will have
no part with a Man who can blow hot and cold from the same mouth.”






THE STAG AT THE LAKE


A STAG, one hot day, came to drink from a clear lake, and stopped to
look at his own image in the water.

“How beautiful are my fine spreading horns!” said he. “How strong and
graceful they are, branching from each side of my head! What a pity it
is that my legs should be so thin and ugly!”

Just at this moment a lion came crashing through the forest and made
ready to spring upon him. Away went the stag! and the legs that he had
despised would soon have carried him out of danger; but when he came to
the thick woods, his beautiful antlers, of which he had been so vain,
caught in the branches and held him fast until the lion came up and
seized him.




THE PEASANT AND THE APPLE TREE


A PEASANT had in his garden an Apple Tree which for year after year
had borne no fruit, but served only as a harbor for sparrows and
grasshoppers.

Seeing no good to himself in the tree, he resolved to cut it down, and,
taking his ax in his hand, he made a bold stroke at its roots.

Each in his own way, the grasshoppers and sparrows entreated him not
to cut down the tree that sheltered them. “We will do our best to make
up to you the worth of the wood, if you will spare it,” they said,
“lightening your labor by our cheering songs.” But he paid no heed to
them and gave a second and a third blow with his ax.

When he reached the hollow of the tree, he found a hive full of honey.
He tasted the honeycomb and at once threw down his ax. From that time
the greatest of care was taken of the tree, and the sparrows and
grasshoppers still found shelter in it. They could not forget, however,
that the man had only saved their home for them from self-interest.




JUPITER, NEPTUNE, MINERVA, AND MOMUS


ACCORDING to an old legend, the first man was made by Jupiter, the
first bull by Neptune, and the first house by Minerva.

On the completion of their labors, a dispute arose as to which had made
the most perfect work.

They agreed to rest the decision with Momus, a judge, and to abide by
his word.

Momus, however, being very envious of the handicraft of each, found
fault in turn with all.

He criticized the work of Neptune because he had not made the horns
of the bull below the eyes, that the animal might better see where to
strike.

He condemned the work of Jupiter because he had not placed the heart of
man on the outside, so that every one might read the thoughts of the
evil-disposed and take precautions against intended mischief.

And last of all, he inveighed against Minerva, not because of any fault
in the house itself but because she had not contrived iron wheels in
its foundation, so that its inhabitants might more easily remove if a
neighbor proved unpleasant.

Indignant at such inveterate fault-finding, Jupiter drove Momus from
his office as judge and expelled him from the mansions of Olympus.




THE FARTHING RUSHLIGHT


A RUSHLIGHT, in love with its own brilliancy, once boasted that its
light was brighter even than that of the sun, the moon, and the stars.

Just then a door opened, and a puff of wind blew it out.

As the owner relighted it, he said: “Cease now your boasting. Be
content to shine in silence. Heavenly lights do not blow out. Know that
not even the stars need to be relit.”




THE HORSE AND THE GROOM


A GROOM, who used to steal a Horse’s corn and sell it, was yet very
busy all the day long in grooming and wisping him. “If you really wish
me,” said the Horse, “to look sleek and fine, give me less currying and
more corn.”




THE TRUMPETER TAKEN PRISONER


A TRUMPETER who had been taken prisoner in a battle begged hard for
his life. “Spare me, I entreat you,” said he; “put me not to death
without cause. I have killed no one, nor do I carry arms, but only this
trumpet.”

“For that very reason,” said they who held him captive, “you shall the
more surely die; for though without the spirit to fight yourself, you
stir up others to violence and bloodshed.”

He who incites to strife is worse than he who takes part in it.




THE BOASTING TRAVELER


A MAN who had traveled in foreign parts bragged, on his return home,
of the great feats he had performed in different places. In Rhodes,
for instance, he had taken so extraordinary a leap that no man could
approach it; and, he said, he had witnesses there to prove that it was
so.

“It is quite possible,” said one who heard him boasting of it, “but
just suppose this to be Rhodes, and try the leap again.”




THE HEDGE AND THE VINEYARD


A FOOLISH young Heir, who had come into possession of his wise father’s
estate, broke up all the Hedges about his Vineyard because they bore
no grapes. The throwing down of these fences laid his grounds open
to man and beast, and his vines were presently destroyed. The simple
fellow learned, when it was too late, that it was quite as necessary to
protect his Vineyard as to possess it.




THE MOUSE AND THE WEASEL


A LITTLE starveling Mouse had made his way with some difficulty into a
basket of corn, where, finding the entertainment much to his liking, he
stuffed and crammed himself to such an extent that when he was ready
to get out again, he found the hole by which he had entered too small
to allow his puffed-out body to pass through. A Weasel, who was drawn
to the spot by his cries, thus counseled him: “Stay where you are, my
friend, and fast till you are thin; for you will never come out till
you reduce yourself to the same condition as when you went in.”




THE WOLF AND THE SHEEP


A WOLF, that had been bitten by a dog and was unable to move, begged a
Sheep that passed by to take pity on his sad case and fetch him some
water from a stream. “If you will bring me a drink,” said he, “I will
find meat myself.”

“Yes,” said the Sheep, “I make no doubt of it; for if I come near
enough to give you the drink, you will make mincemeat of _me_.”




A WIDOW AND HER SHEEP


A CERTAIN widow, who had only a single Sheep and wished to make the
most of his wool, sheared him so closely as to cut his skin as well
as his fleece. The Sheep, smarting under this treatment, cried out:
“Why do you torture me thus? It is no gain to yourself. My blood will
not add to the weight of the wool. If you are after flesh send for
the Butcher, who will end my misery; but if it is only wool that you
want, send for the Shearer, who will clip my fleece without drawing my
blood.”




THE MAN AND THE LION


A MAN and a Lion were once journeying together and came at length to
high words as to which was the braver and stronger creature of the two.
As the dispute waxed warmer they happened to pass, on the roadside, the
statue of a man strangling a lion. “See there,” said the Man. “What
more proof can you have of our undeniable superiority than that?”

“That,” said the Lion, “is a man’s version of the story; let us be the
sculptors, and for one lion under the feet of a man, you shall have
twenty men under the paws of lions.”




THE LIONESS


A GREAT stir was once made as to which of the Beasts could boast of the
largest family. They came in turn to the Lioness. “And how many,” was
asked, “do you have at a birth?”

“One,” she replied; “but that one is a Lion!”

Quality is before quantity.




THE BOY WHO STOLE APPLES


AN Old Man once found a rude Boy in his Apple Tree and sternly ordered
him to come down. The young rogue answered that he would not.

“Then I will fetch you down,” said the Old Man. So he threw twigs and
bundles of grass up at him, but this only made the young scapegrace
laugh.

“Very well,” said the Old Man. “If neither words nor grass will bring
you down, I will try what virtue there is in stones.” With that he
pelted the Boy heartily with stones, which soon brought him down from
the tree to beg the Old Man’s pardon.




THE GOOSE WITH THE GOLDEN EGGS


A CERTAIN man had the good fortune to possess a Goose which laid him a
Golden Egg each day of the year. For a while the man rejoiced in his
daily gain, but becoming impatient with so slow an income, he killed
the Goose, to get all at once the gold which he thought was inside
her. When he had laid her open, he found that she was exactly like all
other geese.

Wanting more, he lost all.




THE OLD MAN AND DEATH


AN Old Laborer, bent with age and toil, was gathering brush in a
forest. Growing tired and hopeless, he threw down his bundle and cried
out: “I can bear this no longer! If only Death would come and relieve
me!”

As he spoke Death came and asked him what it was that he wanted. “Pray,
good sir,” replied the Man, “do me but the favor to lift this bundle of
sticks to my back.”




A FATHER AND HIS TWO DAUGHTERS


A MAN who had two Daughters married one to a Gardener, the other to a
Potter. Going to visit at the Gardener’s, he asked his Daughter how it
fared with her. “Excellently well,” said she; “we have all that we want
if only we may have a heavy rain to water our plants.”

Going on to the Potter’s, he asked his other Daughter how matters went
with her. “There is nothing that we want but that this fine weather and
hot sun may continue, so that our tiles will bake well.”

“Alas,” said the Father, “if you wish for fine weather, and your sister
for rain, which shall I myself pray for?”




THE SICK LION AND THE FOX


A LION who was too old and feeble to hunt for prey saw that he must
get it, if at all, by cunning. He crept into a corner of his den and
feigned sickness. All the animals that came by went in to take a look
at him, and, as they came, he sprang upon them and ate them up. Now,
when this had happened to a good many, the Fox, who had guessed the
trick, came by. From a safe distance he called to the Lion, asking how
he did. The Lion said he was very sick and asked the Fox to come in and
see him. “So I would, gladly,” replied the Fox, “but I notice that all
the footprints point into the den, and there are none pointing out.”




THE MOUNTAIN IN LABOR


IN DAYS of old, a mighty rumbling was heard in a Mountain. It was said
to be in Labor, and multitudes of people flocked together, from near
and from far, to see what the great Mountain would produce. After long
expectation and wise conjecturing from the bystanders, out popped—a
mouse.

A magnificent promise, but a paltry performance.




JUPITER AND THE CAMEL


THE Camel, in days of yore, besought Jupiter to grant him horns,
because it was a great grief to him to see other animals furnished with
what he had not. Jupiter not only refused him horns but cropped his
ears short for his foolish importunity.

By asking for what we do not need, we may lose what we already have.




THE MOON AND HER MOTHER


THE Moon once asked her Mother to make her a little coat that would
fit her well. “How,” replied the Mother, “can I make a cloak to fit
you, when now you are a New Moon, and then a Full Moon, and then again
neither the one nor the other?”




THE HORSE AND THE STAG


A HORSE once had the whole range of a meadow to himself; but when a
Stag came and threatened to damage the pasture, the Horse asked a Man
to assist him in ridding him of the Stag. “I will,” said the Man, “if
you will let me put a bit in your mouth and get upon your back so as
to go and find weapons.” The Horse consented, and the Man accordingly
mounted. But instead of being revenged on the Stag, the Horse has been
from that time the slave of Man.

Revenge is dearly punished at the price of liberty.




THE COUNCIL HELD BY THE RATS


    Old Rodiland, a certain Cat,
    Such havoc of the Rats had made
    ’Twas difficult to find a Rat
    With nature’s debt unpaid.
    The few that did remain,
    To leave their holes afraid,
    From usual food abstain,
    Not eating half their fill.
    And wonder no one will
    That one who made on Rats his revel,
    With Rats passed not for Cat, but devil.



    Now, on a day, this dread rat-eater,
    Who had a wife, went out to meet her.
    And while he held his caterwauling,
    The unkilled Rats, their chapter calling,
    Discussed the point, in grave debate,
    How they might shun impending fate.
    Their dean, a prudent Rat,
    Thought best, and better soon than late,
    To bell the fatal Cat;
    That, when he took his hunting round,
    The Rats, well cautioned by the sound,
    Might hide in safety under ground.
    Indeed, he knew no other means;
        And all the rest
        At once confessed
    Their minds were with the dean’s.
    No better plan, they all believed,
    Could possibly have been conceived.
    No doubt the thing would work right well
    If any one would hang the bell.
    But one by one said every Rat,
    “I’m not so big a fool as that.”
    The plan knocked up in this respect,
    The council closed without effect.
    And many a council I have seen,
    Or reverend chapter, with its dean,
    That, thus resolving wisely,
    Fell through like this, precisely.

            To argue or refute,
              Wise councilors abound.
            The man to execute
              Is harder to be found.




THE RAIN CLOUD


A GREAT Cloud passed rapidly over a country which was parched by heat,
but did not let fall a single drop to refresh it. Presently it poured
copious streams of rain into the sea and, when it had done so, began to
boast of its generosity in the hearing of the neighboring Mountain.

But the Mountain replied: “What good have you done by such generosity?
and how can any one help being pained at the sight of it? If you
had poured your showers over the land, you might have saved a whole
district from famine. But as to the sea, my friend, it has plenty of
water already, without additions from you.”




THE ELEPHANT IN FAVOR


ONCE upon a time the Elephant stood high in the good graces of the
Lion. The forest immediately began to talk of the matter, and, as
usual, many guesses were made as to the means by which the Elephant had
gained such favor.

“It is no beauty,” say the beasts to each other, “and it is not
amusing; and what habits it has! what manners!”

“If it had possessed such a bushy tail as mine, I should not have
wondered,” says the Fox.

“Or, sister,” says the Bear, “if it had gotten into favor on account of
its claws, no one would have found the matter at all extraordinary; but
it has no claws at all, as we all know well.”

“Isn’t it its tusks that have gotten it into favor?” thus the Ox broke
in upon their conversation. “Haven’t they, perhaps, been mistaken for
horns?”

Then said the Ass, shaking its ears, “Is it possible that you don’t
know how it has succeeded in making itself liked, and in becoming
distinguished. Why, I have guessed the reason. If it hadn’t been
remarkable for its long ears, it would never in the world have gotten
into favor.”




THE CUCKOO AND THE EAGLE


THE Eagle promoted the Cuckoo to the rank of a Nightingale, and at
once, proud of its new position, the Cuckoo seated itself upon an aspen
and began to exercise its musical talents.

After a time it looked around. All the other birds were flying away,
some laughing and others abusing it. The Cuckoo grew angry, and
hastened to the Eagle with a complaint against the birds.

“Have pity on me!” it begged. “I have been appointed Nightingale to
these woods, and yet the birds dare laugh at my singing.”

“My friend,” answered the Eagle, “I am a king, but I am not a god. It
is impossible for me to remedy the cause of your complaint. I can order
a Cuckoo to be styled a Nightingale, but to make a Nightingale out of a
Cuckoo—that I cannot do.”






THE FOX IN THE ICE


VERY early one winter morning, during a hard frost, a Fox was drinking
at a hole in the ice not far from the haunts of men.

Meanwhile, whether by accident or from negligence does not matter, the
end of its tail got wet and froze to the ice.

No great harm was done; the Fox could easily remedy it. It had only to
give a tolerably hard pull and leave about a score of hairs behind;
then it could run home quickly before any one came.

But how could it make up its mind to spoil its tail? Such a bushy tail
as it was—so ample, so golden! No; better wait a little. Surely men are
sleeping still. It is even possible that a thaw may set in meanwhile.
In that case it will be able to withdraw its tail easily from the ice
hole.

So it waits; it goes on waiting, but its tail only freezes all the
more. The Fox looks round; the day is already beginning to dawn.
People are stirring; voices are to be heard. Our poor Fox begins to
move wildly about, now this way and now that. But still it cannot free
itself from the hole.

Luckily, a Wolf comes running that way.

“Dear friend! father!” cries the Fox; “do save me; I am all but lost!”

So the Wolf stopped and set to work to rescue the Fox. Its method was a
simple one—it bit the tail clean off.

So our foolish friend went home tailless, but rejoicing that its skin
was still on its back.




THE INQUISITIVE MAN


“GOOD day, dear friend; where do you come from?”

“From the Museum, where I have spent three hours. I saw everything they
have there, and examined it carefully. So much have I seen to astonish
me that, if you will believe me, I am neither strong nor clever enough
to give you the description of it. Upon my word, it is a palace of
wonders.

“How rich is Nature in inventions! What birds and beasts have I
not seen there! What flies, butterflies, cockroaches, and curious
beetles—some like emeralds, others like corals! And what tiny cochineal
insects! Why, really, some of them are smaller than a pin’s head.”

“But did you see the elephant? What did you think of it? I’ll be bound
you felt as if you were at a mountain.”

“The elephant? Are you quite sure it is there?”

“Quite sure.”

“Well, brother, you mustn’t be too hard on me; but to tell the truth, I
didn’t remark the elephant.”




THE SQUIRREL IN SERVICE


A SQUIRREL once served a Lion—I know not where or in what capacity. But
this much is certain—the Squirrel found favor in the Lion’s eyes, and
to satisfy the Lion is certainly no light affair.

In return for this he was promised a whole wagonload of nuts.

Promised—yes; but meanwhile time continues to fly by. The Squirrel
often suffers hunger and, while grinning in his masters presence, has
eyes full of tears.

When he looks around in the forest, his former comrades show themselves
here and there, high up among the trees. He looks at them till his eyes
begin to blink, but they keep on cracking nuts.

The Squirrel takes a look at them—he can do no more. At one time he is
called away; at another, even dragged off in the Lion’s service.

But see! At last the Squirrel has grown old and become tiresome to the
Lion. It is time for him to retire. They have granted the Squirrel
his discharge, and they have actually given him the full load of
nuts—excellent nuts, such as the world has never seen before; all
picked fruit, one as good as another, a perfect marvel. Only one thing
is unlucky—the Squirrel has long ago lost all his teeth.




THE WOLF AND THE CAT


A WOLF ran out of the forest into a village—not to pay a visit, but to
save its life; for it trembled for its skin.

The huntsman and a pack of hounds were after it.

It would fain have rushed in through the first gateway, but there was
this unfortunate circumstance in the way—all the gateways were closed.

The Wolf saw a Cat on a partition fence and said pleadingly: “Vaska, my
friend, tell me quickly, which of the moujiks here is the kindest, so
that I may hide myself from my evil foes. Listen to the cry of the dogs
and the terrible sound of the horns. All that noise is actually made in
chase of me.”

“Go quickly and ask Stefan,” said Vaska, the Cat; “he is a very kind
man.”

“Quite true; only I have torn the skin off one of his sheep.”

“Well, then, try Demian.”

“I’m afraid he’s angry with me, too; I carried off one of his kids.”

“Run over there, then; Trofim lives there.”

“Trofim! I should be afraid of even meeting him. Ever since the spring
he has been threatening me about a lamb.”

“Dear me, that’s bad! But perhaps Klim will protect you.”



“Oh, Vaska, I have killed one of his calves!”

“What do I hear, friend? You’ve quarreled with all the village,” said
Vaska to the Wolf. “What sort of protection can you hope for here? No,
no; our peasants are not so destitute of sense as to be willing to save
you to their own hurt. And, really, you have only yourself to blame.
What you have sown, that you must now reap.”




APPENDIX


NOTE. Since the purpose of the fable is not merely to entertain but
especially to point some general truth or to draw a helpful lesson,
no two versions of the same fable are exactly alike. In editions of
Æsop intended for young children, it has been the custom to elaborate
the slender story in such a way as to arouse thoroughly the child’s
interest before the moral is drawn. Hence the modern popular versions
often contain conversations and descriptive details not to be found
in the accounts which are truest to the Greek versions. This popular
elaborated form of the fable, however, needs no apology so long as
the editor is true to the spirit of the original. In the preceding
fables, the spirit, if not the letter of the most trustworthy account
available, has been carefully adhered to, but the editor has had always
in mind the youthful readers and has neglected no opportunity to make
the text fit their limited experience and understanding. But to both
teacher and pupil the current short forms of some of the longer fables
will have interest. In this Appendix, therefore, have been collected
the short forms of the first fables which appear in the text. Much
pleasure and profit can be had from a comparison of the two renderings,
and such a comparison will open the way to a discussion of the
difficulties in handing down literature orally and in preserving it in
correct form.




THE WOLF AND THE LAMB


A WOLF and a Lamb came to a running brook to quench their thirst. The
Wolf stood high up the stream and the Lamb a little distance below.
Having made up his mind to seize the Lamb, the Wolf bethought himself
how he might justify his act of violence. Running down to her, he
roared, “How dare you muddle the water so that I cannot drink it?”

The Lamb, affrighted by the charge, humbly replied that she could not
see how that could be, since the water ran down from him to her and not
from her to him. “Be that as it may,” retorted the Wolf. “You are a
rascal, all the same, and I have heard that you said bad things of me
last year behind my back.”

“Nay,” said the Lamb, “that could not have been, for a year ago I was
not born.”

“Well, if it was not you it was your father, and that is all the same,”
replied the Wolf, and he fell upon the Lamb and tore her to pieces.




THE FOX AND THE LION


THE first time the Fox saw the Lion, he was ready to die of fear. The
second time he took courage and could even bear to look upon him. The
third time he had the impudence to come up to him, to salute him, and
to enter into familiar conversation with him.




THE DOG AND HIS SHADOW


A DOG had stolen a piece of meat out of a butcher’s shop and was
crossing a river on his way home, when he saw his own shadow reflected
in the stream below. Thinking it was another dog with another piece of
meat, he resolved to secure it. He snapped at his supposed treasure,
but in doing so dropped the piece he was carrying and so lost all.




THE CRAB AND HIS MOTHER


SAID an old Crab to a young one, “Why do you walk so crooked, child?
Walk straight!” “Mother,” said the young Crab, “show me the way, will
you? When I see you taking a straight course, I will try and follow.”

Example is better than precept.




THE FOX AND THE GRAPES


A FOX came at vintage time to a place where ripe grapes were hanging
in tempting clusters over the branch of a tree. “I will get them,”
said the Fox. He made many a spring and jump, but failing each time to
secure the prize, he at length walked away, muttering, “Well, what does
it matter? The grapes are sour.”




THE WOLF AND THE CRANE


A WOLF had a bone in his throat and ran up and down in the greatest
agony, begging every animal he met to relieve him, hinting at the
same time that there would be a substantial reward. A Crane, moved
by his entreaties, ventured her long neck down the Wolf’s throat and
drew forth the bone. When she had done it, she modestly asked for the
promised reward. To which the Wolf, grinning and showing his teeth,
replied, “Ungrateful creature, is it not enough that you have had your
head in a Wolf’s mouth and brought it out safe?”




THE ANTS AND THE GRASSHOPPERS


A COLONY of Ants were busily employed in the care and preservation of
their food, which they exposed to the air in heaps around their country
habitation.

A Grasshopper, who had chanced to out-live the summer and was ready to
die from cold and hunger, approached with great humility and begged
that they would relieve his necessity with one grain of wheat or rye.
One of the Ants asked him how he had disposed of his time in the
summer, that he had not taken pains and laid in a stock as they had
done.

“Alas! gentlemen,” said he, “I passed away the time merrily and
pleasantly in drinking, singing, and dancing, and never once thought of
winter.”

“If that be the case,” replied the Ant, “all I have to say is that they
who drink, sing, and dance in summer must starve in winter.”




THE FROGS WHO ASKED FOR A KING


THE commonwealth of Frogs, a discontented race, weary of liberty and
fond of change, petitioned Jupiter to grant them a King.

The good-natured deity, in order to grant their request with as little
mischief to them as possible, threw them down a Log. The splash sent
them into the greatest terror and amazement, and at first they regarded
their new monarch with great reverence and kept at a respectful
distance. But by degrees, perceiving his amiable and peaceable
disposition, they gradually ventured to approach him with more
familiarity, till at length they conceived for him the utmost contempt.

Dissatisfied with this state of things, they renewed their request to
Jupiter and entreated him to bestow upon them another King.

In his wrath the Thunderer sent them a Crane, who no sooner took
possession of his new dominion than he began to devour his subjects,
one after another.

They were now far more dissatisfied than before. Applying to Jupiter
a third time, they were dismissed with the reproof that the evil of
which they complained they had imprudently brought upon themselves; and
that now they had no other remedy but to submit to it with patience.




THE DONKEY IN THE LION’S SKIN


A DONKEY, having put on the skin of a Lion, which he found drying by
the roadside, roamed about the forest and amused himself by frightening
all the animals that he met. At length, meeting a Fox, he tried to
frighten him also; but the Fox no sooner heard the sound of his voice
than he exclaimed, “I might possibly have been frightened if I had not
heard you bray.”




THE MICE IN COUNCIL


THE Mice, being sadly distressed on account of their common enemy the
Cat, called a council to devise means of ridding themselves of the
annoyance. Many plans were proposed and rejected, till at last it was
suggested by a young Mouse that a bell should be hung round the Cat’s
neck, that having notice of her coming, they might escape to their
holes.

The proposal was hailed with applause and agreed to unanimously.
Whereupon an old Mouse, who had sat in silence, got up and said, “That
is well, but who will bell the Cat?” The Mice looked one at another,
but no one answered.

The old Mouse said, “It is easy to advise; what is wanted is some one
to act.”




THE KID AND THE WOLF


A KID, coming alone from its pasture, was pursued by a Wolf. With great
presence of mind the kid turned and said: “I know, Friend Wolf, that
you mean to kill me; but as my life is to be short, let it be a merry
one. Do you pipe and let me have one more dance before I die.” While
the Wolf was piping and the Kid was dancing, some Dogs, hearing the
music, ran to the place to see what was going on; and the Wolf was glad
to take himself off as fast as his legs would carry him.




THE HAWK AND THE NIGHTINGALE


THE Nightingale, sitting aloft upon an oak, was seen by a Hawk, who
swooped down and seized her. The Nightingale earnestly prayed the Hawk
to let her go, saying that she was not big enough to satisfy the hunger
of a Hawk, who ought to find plenty of larger birds. “Do you happen
to see many large birds flying about?” the Hawk asked. “I should be
foolish, indeed, to let you go for the sake of larger birds that are
not in sight. A morsel is better than nothing.”




THE CROW AND THE PITCHER


A CROW who was nearly perishing with thirst spied a pitcher with a
little water in it. Reaching down, he found the water so low that,
stooping and straining as he might, he was unable to reach it with his
beak. Thereupon he tried to overturn and break the Pitcher. This he was
not strong enough to do. At last, seeing some small pebbles, he brought
a great many and dropped them one by one, and so raised the water to
the brim and quenched his thirst.




THE ANT AND THE DOVE


GOING to a fountain to quench his thirst, an Ant tumbled in and was
ready to drown. But a Dove happened to be perching on a neighboring
tree and saw the Ant’s danger. Plucking a leaf, the Dove dropped
it down into the water, so that the Ant mounting upon it was blown
safely to the shore. A Fowler, shortly after, spread his net to entrap
the unwary Dove. This the Ant perceived, and bit the Fowler’s heel.
Distracted by the pain, the Fowler dropped his net with a quick start,
and the Dove, aroused to a sense of danger, flew away.

One good turn deserves another.




THE OX AND THE FROG


AN Ox, grazing in a swampy meadow, chanced to set his foot among a
number of young Frogs and trampled nearly all of them to death. One
that escaped ran off to his mother with the dreadful news. “It was a
beast—such a big four-footed beast—that did it.”

“Big?” asked the old Frog, and she puffed herself out, “as big as this?”

“A great deal bigger,” said the little one.

“Well, was it so big?” and she swelled herself out yet more.

“Indeed, Mother, but it was; and if you were to burst yourself you
would never reach half its size.” Vexed that her child should disparage
her powers, the Mother Frog made one more trial and burst herself
indeed.




THE BAT AND THE WEASELS


A BAT, falling to the ground, was caught by a Weasel, whom he entreated
not to take his life. The Weasel protested that it was against nature
for a weasel to let a bird go. Whereupon the Bat insisted that he was
not a bird, and to prove it, called attention to his mouselike head and
ears, which so confused the Weasel that he let the Bat go.

Some time afterward, on another flight, the Bat fell again to the
ground, and another Weasel caught him. On perceiving that the Weasel
thought he was a mouse, the Bat contended that he had wings and
therefore was not a mouse, and was again allowed to go free.




THE FOX AND THE GOAT


A FOX who had fallen into a deep well was casting about to find how he
should get out again. At length a Goat came to the place, and seeing
Reynard, asked whether the water was good, and if there was plenty.

Hiding the real danger in his case, the Fox replied: “The best in the
world, and so much of it that it cannot be exhausted. Come down and
see.” Whereupon the Goat jumped down without more ado. Upon this the
crafty Fox jumped upon her horns and nimbly leaped out, remarking to
the deluded Goat, “If you had brains to match your beard, you would
have looked before you leaped.”




THE WOMAN AND HER HEN


A THRIFTY Woman kept a Hen that could be depended on to lay an egg
every morning. The watchful Woman thought within herself, “If I were to
double my Hen’s allowance of barley, she would lay twice a day.” So she
tried her plan, and the Hen became so fat and sleek that she left off
laying at all.

Thrift sometimes overreaches, and figures are not always facts.




THE DOG IN THE MANGER


A DOG once made his bed in a manger and lay there snarling and growling
at whoever came by. The Oxen coming for their provender said: “What a
miserable cur! neither to eat the grain himself nor to let any one else
eat it!”




THE MOUSE, THE FROG, AND THE HAWK


A MOUSE in an evil day made the acquaintance of a Frog, and together
they set off on their travels. On pretense of affection and of keeping
his companion safe from harm, the Frog tied the Mouse’s forefoot to
his own hind leg, and thus they proceeded. It worked well enough till
they came to some water, and the Frog, bidding the Mouse to have
good courage, plunged in and began to swim across. They were barely
halfway when the Frog took a sudden plunge to the bottom, dragging the
unfortunate Mouse after him. But the struggling of the Mouse made so
great a commotion in the water that it attracted the attention of a
Hawk, who, pouncing down and bearing away the Mouse, carried the Frog
also.

Alliances that are ill-matched generally end in disaster; and the one
who compasses the destruction of his neighbor is often caught in his
own snare.




THE SHEPHERD BOY AND THE WOLF


A SHEPHERD boy, tending his flock on the edge of a village, used to
amuse himself at times by crying out, “Wolf! Wolf!” Twice or thrice his
trick succeeded. The whole village ran to his assistance, only to be
laughed at for their pains. At last, one day, the Wolf came indeed. The
Boy cried out as before, and this time in earnest. But the villagers,
supposing him to be at his old sport, paid no heed to his cries, and
the Wolf devoured the sheep.




THE FISHERMAN AND THE LITTLE FISH


AFTER toiling all day and catching nothing, a Fisherman pulled up a
little Fish. The Fish besought him to let him go, for he was small now,
but by and by he would grow to be a big fish and so be worth catching.
But the Fisherman answered, “No, no, I have you now, it would be
foolish for me to let you go; I might not get you when you had grown
bigger.”

A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.




THE FOX AND THE CROW


A CROW snatched a piece of cheese out of a window and flew with it up
into a tree, to eat it at leisure. A Fox passing by chanced to look
up and saw her. He coveted the prize and thus made his approaches
to secure it. “O Crow,” said he, “how beautiful are thy wings and
how bright are thine eyes! how graceful thy neck! What a pity that
such a bird should want only a voice!” Yielding to the flattery, the
Crow opened her mouth to surprise the Fox with her caw, when down
dropped the cheese, which the Fox, snapping up, ate as he walked away,
remarking that whatever he had said of her voice he did not say of her
brains.




THE PARTRIDGE AND THE FOWLER


A PARTRIDGE, having been taken in the net of a Fowler, cried out
piteously, “Spare me, good Master Fowler, and I promise you, on my
word, that I will decoy other partridges into your net.”

“No,” replied the man, “whatever I might have done, I am determined
now not to let you go; for no death is too bad for one who is ready to
betray his friends.”




THE THIRSTY PIGEON


A PIGEON, pressed by thirst and seeing a glass of water painted on a
sign, supposed it to be real. Dashing down at it with all her might,
she struck against the hard board, and breaking her wing, she fell
helpless to the ground and was soon captured by one who passed by.

Great haste is not always good speed.




THE THREE TRADESMEN


THERE was a certain city in danger of being besieged, and a council
was called accordingly, to consider the best means of fortifying it.
A Bricklayer gave his judgment that no material was so good for the
purpose as brick. A Carpenter begged leave to suggest that timber would
be preferable, upon which a Currier started up and said, “Sirs, when
all has been said that can be said, there is nothing in the world like
leather.”




THE HARES AND THE FROGS


IN DESPERATION over the hard times they had on account of their many
enemies, the Hares came together and, after rehearsing their situation,
came to the sad conclusion that nothing was left to them but to drown
themselves as the most miserable and unfortunate of creatures. They
repaired to a pond to throw themselves off a rock into the water and
thus make an end of their troubles. A shoal of frogs were sitting
around the edge of the pond, and at the approach of the Hares they
were startled, and with the greatest confusion jumped into the water.
Whereupon the foremost of the Hares said to his fellows: “Nay, then,
friends, our case may not be as desperate as we thought. Here are other
creatures more faint-hearted than are we.”




THE EAGLE AND THE FOX


AN EAGLE and a Fox had lived together as good neighbors, the former
on the summit of a high tree, the latter in a hole at the foot of it.
One day when the Fox was abroad, the Eagle swooped down and snatched
the Fox’s cub and carried it up to her nest, thinking that her high
dwelling made her secure from the Fox’s revenge. The Fox returning
upbraided the Eagle for such a breach of confidence and begged to have
her young one returned to her. Finding that her entreaties availed
nothing, the Fox snatched a brand from an altar fire which had been
lighted hard by and proceeded to involve the whole tree in flames. The
Eagle, to protect her nest and her own young ones, restored the cub
to its mother, which she would not do in answer to the most earnest
entreaties.


THE TWO CRABS.


Two Crabs, the mother and daughter, having been left by the receding
tide, were creeping again towards the water, when the former observing
the awkward gait of her daughter, got into a great passion, and desired
her to move straight forward, in a more becoming and sprightly manner,
and not crawl sideling along in a way so contrary to all the rest of
the world. Indeed mother, says the young Crab, I walk as properly as I
can, and to the best of my knowledge; but if you would have me to go
otherwise, I beg you would be so good as to practise it first, and shew
me by your own example how you would have me to conduct myself.


APPLICATION.

Ill examples corrupt even the best natural disposition, and it is in
vain to instruct our children, their talents being only imitation, to
walk by one rule, if we ourselves go by another. The good precepts
which we may lay down to them, will be bestowed in vain, if they
see by our own conduct, that we pursue a contrary course to that
which we recommend to them. Parents therefore, who are desirous of
working an effectual reformation in their children, should begin by
making a visible amendment in themselves; and this is a duty they owe
to society, as well as to their offspring, it being of the utmost
importance to both, that probity and honour be early instilled into
their youthful minds, as these grow with their growth, and while at
the same time they command respect, they lay the foundation of their
individual happiness through life.








THE APE AND HER YOUNG ONES.


An Ape having two young ones, was dotingly fond of one, but disregarded
and slighted the other. One day she chanced to be surprized by the
hunters, and had much ado to get off. However, she did not forget her
favourite young one, which she took up in her arms, that it might be
the more secure: the other, which she neglected, by natural instinct,
leapt upon her back, and so away they scampered together; but it
unluckily fell out, in the over-anxiety of her precipitate flight,
confused and blinded with haste, that she struck her favourite’s head
against a branch, which threw it on the ground, where the darling
bantling was seized by the dogs and killed. The hated one, clinging
close to her rough back, escaped all the danger of the pursuit.


APPLICATION.

    By dear mamma’s o’er-weening fondness spoil’d,
    Caress’d and pamper’d, dies the fav’rite child:
    The boy she slights, rough, vig’rous, and well-grown,
    Unaided, bears the brunt, and shifts alone.

The indulgence which parents shew to their children arises from the
most amiable of human weaknesses; but it is not the less injurious in
its effects, and therefore it is of great importance to guard against
it, and not to suffer a blind fondness to transport us beyond the
bounds of a discreet affection, for this often proves the ruin of the
child. This fable is also intended to expose the folly of a system of
favouritism in families, for experience shews that those children who
are the least pampered and indulged usually make the best and cleverest
men.








THE BOY AND HIS MOTHER.


A little Boy having stolen a book from one of his school-fellows,
took it to his Mother, who, instead of correcting him, praised his
sharpness, and rewarded him. In process of time, as he grew bigger,
he increased also in villainy, till at length he was taken up for
committing a great robbery, and was brought to justice and condemned
for it. As the officers were conducting him to the gallows, he was
attended by a vast crowd, and among the rest his Mother came sobbing
along, and deploring her son’s unhappy fate; which the criminal
observing, he begged leave to speak to her: this being granted, he put
his mouth to her ear, as if he was going to whisper something, and
bit it off! The officer, shocked at this behaviour, asked him if the
crimes he had committed were not sufficient to glut his wickedness,
without being also guilty of such an unnatural violence towards his
mother? Let no one wonder, said he, that I have done this to her, for
she deserves even worse at my hands. For if she had chastised instead
of praising and encouraging me, when I stole my school-fellow’s book, I
should not now have been brought to this ignominious and untimely end.


APPLICATION.

The approaches to vice are by slow degrees, and the good or evil bias
given to youth is seldom eradicated. The first deviations from sound
morality should therefore be most strictly watched, and wickedness
checked or punished in time; for when vice grows into a habit, it
becomes incurable, and both good governments and private families are
deeply concerned in its attendant consequences. One need not scruple to
affirm that most of the depravity which is so frequent in the world,
and so pernicious to society, is owing to the bad education of youth;
and to the connivance or ill example of their parents. It is therefore
of the utmost consequence that parents, guardians, and tutors, should
be of characters befitting them for the various and important offices
they have to perform. The latter description of persons may and ought
to be carefully selected; but it is to be lamented that the base and
mean-spirited hosts of bad parents are out of the reach of controul,
and nothing can prevent the evils arising from their tutorage. Perhaps
it would be harsh to make laws to check the marriages of such; but
there is no need to encourage the breed of them, for they are already
over abundantly numerous.






THE MASTER AND HIS SCHOLAR.


As a School-master was walking upon the bank of a river, he heard a
cry as of one in distress: advancing a few paces farther, he saw one
of his Scholars in the water, hanging by the branch of a willow. The
Boy had, it seems, been learning to swim with corks, and now thinking
himself sufficiently experienced, had thrown these implements aside,
and ventured into the water without them; but the force of the stream
having hurried him out of his depth, he had certainly been drowned, had
not the branch of the tree providentially hung in his way. The Master
took up the corks, which lay upon the ground, and throwing them to his
Scholar, made use of this opportunity to read a lecture to him upon the
inconsiderate rashness of youth. Let this be an example to you, says
he, in the conduct of your future life, never to throw away your corks
till time has given you strength and experience enough to swim without
them.


APPLICATION.

Rashness is the peculiar vice of youth, and may be stiled the
characteristic foible of that season of life. The foundation of this
rashness is laid in a fond conceit of their own abilities, which
tempts them to undertake affairs too great for their capacities, and
to venture out of their depths, or to suffer themselves to be hurried
into the most precipitate and dangerous measures, before they find out
their own weakness and inability. It therefore behoves inexperienced
young men to keep a cautious guard over their passions, to check the
irregularities of their disposition, and to listen to the wholesome
advice and good council of those whose judgments are matured by age
and experience: for few are above the need of advice, nor are we ever
too old to learn any thing for which we may be the better. But young
men, above all, should not disdain to open their eyes to good example,
and their ears to admonition: neither should they be ashamed to borrow
rules for their behaviour in the world, until they are enabled from
their own knowledge of men and things, to stem its crooked tides and
currents with ease and honour to themselves.

    Consult your elders, use their sense alone,
    Till age and practice have confirm’d your own.








INDUSTRY AND SLOTH.


An indolent Young Man being asked why he lay in bed so long? jocosely
answered, “Every morning of my life I am hearing causes. I have two
fine girls, their names are Industry and Sloth, close at my bed-side
as soon as I awake, pressing their different suits. One intreats me to
get up, the other persuades me to lie still; and then they alternately
give me various reasons why I should rise, and why I should not. This
detains me so long, (it being the duty of an impartial judge to hear
all that can be said on either side) that before the pleadings are
over, it is time to go to dinner.”


APPLICATION.

    “He who defers his work from day to day,
    Does on a river’s brink expecting stay,
    ’Till the whole stream which stopt him shall be gone,
    Which, as it runs, for ever will run on.”

Indolence is like a stream which flows slowly on, but yet it undermines
every virtue; it rusts the mind, and gives a tincture to every
action of one’s life, the term of which does not allow time for long
protracted deliberations; and yet how many waste more of their time
in idly considering which of two affairs to begin first, than would
have ended them both? To-morrow is still the fatal time when all is
to be done; to-morrow comes, it goes, and still indolence pleases
itself with the shadow, while it loses the substance: and thus men pass
through life like a bird through the air, and leave no track behind
them, unmindful that the present time alone is ours, and should be
managed with judicious care, since we cannot secure a moment to come,
nor recal one that is past. It is no matter how many good qualities
the mind may be possessed of; they all lie dormant if we want the
necessary vigour and resolution to draw them forth; for this slumber
of the mind leaves no difference between the greatest genius and the
meanest understanding. Neither the mind nor the body can be active and
vigorous without proper exertion, and trouble springs from idleness,
and grievous toil from useless ease; therefore, “whatsoever thy hand
findeth to do, do it with all thy might, for there is no work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou goest.”






THE YOUNG MAN AND THE SWALLOW.


A prodigal thoughtless young Man, who had wasted his whole patrimony in
taverns and gaming-houses, among his lewd idle companions, was taking
a melancholy walk near a brook. It was in the spring, while the hills
were yet capped with snow, but it happened to be one of those clear
sunny days which some times occur at that time of the year; and to
make appearances the more flattering, a Swallow which had been invited
forth by the warmth, flew skimming along upon the surface of the water.
The Youth observing this, concluded that the summer was now come, and
that he should have little or no occasion for clothes, so went and
pawned them, and ventured the money for one stake more, among his
sharping associates. When this too was gone, like all the rest of his
property, he took another solitary walk in the same place as before,
but the weather being severe and frosty, every thing had put on a very
different aspect; the brook was frozen over, and the poor Swallow lay
dead upon the bank. At this, the Youth, smarting under the sense of
his own misery, mistakingly reproached the Swallow as the cause of all
his misfortunes: he cried out, oh, unhappy bird, thou hast undone both
thyself and me, who was so credulous as to trust to thy appearance.


APPLICATION.

They who frequent taverns and gaming-houses, and keep bad company,
should not wonder if they are reduced in a very short time to penury
and want. The wretched young fellows who once addict themselves to
such a scandalous course of life, scarcely think of or attend to any
thing besides: they seem to have nothing else in their heads but how
they may squander what they have got, and where they may get more when
that is gone. They do not make the same use of their reason as other
people, but like the jaundiced eye, view every thing in a false light,
and having turned a deaf ear to all advice, and pursued their unaltered
course until all their property is irrecoverably lost, when at length
misery forces upon them a sense of their situation, they still lay the
blame upon any cause but the right one--their own extravagance and
folly; like the Prodigal in the fable, who would not have considered a
solitary occurrence as a general indication of the season, had not his
own wicked desires blinded his understanding.






THE COLLIER AND THE FULLER.


The Collier and the Fuller being old acquaintances, happened upon a
time to meet together, and the latter being but ill provided with a
habitation, was invited by the former to come and live in the same
house with him. I thank you, my dear friend, replied the Fuller, for
your kind offer; but it cannot be, for if I were to dwell with you,
whatever I should take pains to scour and make clean in the morning,
the dust of you and your coals would blacken and defile before night.


APPLICATION.

It is of no small importance in life to be cautious what company we
keep, and with whom we enter into friendship; for though we are ever so
well disposed ourselves, and free from vice, yet if those with whom
we frequently converse, are engaged in a lewd, wicked course, it will
be almost impossible for us to escape being drawn in with them. If we
are truly wise, and would shun those rocks of pleasure upon which so
many have split, we should forbid ourselves all manner of commerce and
correspondence with those who are steering a course, which reason tells
us is not only not for our advantage, but would end in our destruction.
All the virtue we can boast of, will not be sufficient to insure our
safety, if we embark in bad company; for though our philosophy were
such as would preserve us from being tainted and infected with their
manners, yet their characters would twist and entwine themselves along
with ours, in so intricate a fold, that the world would not take the
trouble to unravel and separate them. Reputation is of a blending
nature, like water; that which is derived from the clearest spring, if
it chance to mix with a foul current, runs on undistinguished, in one
muddy stream, and must ever partake of the colour and condition of its
associate.








THE HUSBANDMAN AND HIS SONS.


A Husbandman, at the point of death, being desirous that his Sons
should pursue the same innocent course of agriculture in which he
himself had been engaged all his life, made use of this expedient.
He called them to his bed-side, and said: All the patrimony I have
to bequeath to you, my sons, is my farm and my vine-yard, of which I
make you joint heirs; but I charge you not to let them go out of your
own occupation, for if I have any treasure besides, it lies buried
somewhere in the ground within a foot of the surface. This made the
Sons conclude that he talked of money which he had hidden: so after
their father’s death, with unwearied diligence, they carefully dug up
every inch, and though they found not the money they expected, the
ground, by being well stirred and loosened, produced so plentiful
a crop of all that was sown in it, as proved a real, and that no
inconsiderable treasure.


APPLICATION.

The good name and the good counsel of a father, are the best legacies
he can leave to his children; and they ought to revere the one, and
keep in mind the other. The wealth which a man acquires by his honest
industry affords him greater pleasure in the enjoyment, than when
acquired in any other way; and men who by personal labour have obtained
a competency, know its value better than those can who have had it
showered upon them without any efforts of their own. Idleness engenders
disease, while exercise is the great prop of health, and health is the
greatest blessing of life, which consideration alone ought to stimulate
men to pursue some useful employment; and among the almost endless
number of those, to which good laws and well-organized society give
birth and encouragement, there are none equal to the culture of the
earth, none which yield a more grateful return. The pleasures derived
both from agriculture and horticulture, are so various, so delightful,
and so natural to man, that they are not easily to be described, and
are never to be excelled: for in whatever way they are pursued, the
mind may be constantly entertained with the wonderful œconomy of the
vegetable world; and the nerves are invigorated and kept in proper tone
by the freshness of the earth, and the fragrancy of the air, which
blush the countenance with health, and give a relish to every meal.






THE PROUD FROG AND THE OX.


An Ox, grazing in a meadow, chanced to set his foot among a parcel of
young Frogs, and trod one of them to death. The rest informed their
mother, when she came home, what had happened; telling her, that the
beast which did it, was the hugest creature that they ever saw in their
lives. What, was it so big? says the old Frog, swelling and blowing up
her speckled belly to a great degree. Oh! bigger by a vast deal, say
they: and so big? says she, straining herself yet more. Indeed, say
they, if you were to burst yourself, you would never be so big. She
strove yet again, and burst herself indeed.


APPLICATION.

How many vain people, of moderate easy circumstances, by entertaining
the silly ambition of vying with their superiors in station and
fortune, get into the direct road to ruin. In whatever station of life
it may have pleased Providence to place us, we ought to determine
upon living within our income, and to endeavour by honesty, sobriety,
and industry, to maintain our ground. Young men, upon their launching
out into the world, would do well deeply to reflect upon this, for
their future peace of mind and happiness greatly depend upon it. They
need only look a little about them to see how a contrary conduct has
operated upon thousands; and it is to be feared, will continue to fill
our gaols with debtors, and Bedlam with lunatics.








THE STAG LOOKING INTO THE WATER.


A Stag drinking, saw himself in the water, and pleased with the sight,
stood contemplating his shape. Ah, says he, what a glorious pair of
branching horns are here, how gracefully do these antlers project
over my forehead, and give an agreeable turn to my whole face; but I
have such legs as really make me ashamed; they look so very long and
unsightly, that I had rather have none at all. In the midst of this
soliloquy, he was alarmed with the cry of a pack of hounds. Away he
flies in some consternation, and bounding nimbly over the plain, threw
dogs and men at a vast distance behind him. After which, taking a
very thick copse, he had the ill fortune to be entangled by his horns
in the branches, where he was held fast till the hounds came up and
seized him. In the pangs of death, he is said to have uttered these
words: Unhappy creature that I am, I am too late convinced that what I
prided myself in, has been the cause of my undoing; and what I so much
disliked, was the only thing that could have saved me.


APPLICATION.

We often make a false estimate, in preferring our ornamental talents
to our useful ones, and are apt to place our love and admiration on
wrong objects. When our vanity is stronger than our reason, show and
ostentation find easy admission into our hearts, and we are much fonder
of specious trifles than useful plainness. But the truest mark of
wisdom is to estimate things at their just value, and to know whence
the most solid advantages may be derived: otherwise, like the Stag in
the Fable, we may happen to admire those accomplishments which are
not only of no real use, but often prove prejudicial to us, while we
despise those things on which our safety may depend. He that does not
know himself, will often form a false judgment upon other matters that
most materially concern him; and thus it fares with many, who suffer
themselves to be deluded with the false pomp of high life, and whose
vanity prompts them to conceive they possess talents which qualify them
to shine in that circle, into which, had they judged rightly, they
never would have entered, but rather have applied themselves to improve
other qualifications, which might have insured their own happiness, and
have rendered them useful members of society.






THE LEOPARD AND THE FOX.


The Leopard, one day, took it into his head to value himself upon the
great variety and beauty of his spots, and truly he saw no reason why
even the Lion should take place of him, since he could not shew so
beautiful a skin. As for the rest of the wild beasts of the forest, he
treated them all without distinction in the most haughty and disdainful
manner. But the Fox being among them, went up to him with a great deal
of spirit and resolution, and told him that he was mistaken in the
value he was pleased to set upon himself, since people of judgment were
not used to form their opinion of merit from an outside appearance, but
by considering the good qualities and endowments with which the mind
was stored within.


APPLICATION.

Wise men are chiefly captivated with the beauty of the mind, rather
than that of the person; and whenever they are infatuated with a
passion for any thing else, it is generally observed that they cease,
during that time at least, to be what they were, and indeed are
only considered to be playing the fool. It too often happens that
women of remarkable beauty are so fully satisfied with their outward
excellencies, that they totally neglect the improvement of their
minds; not considering that it is only a combination of mental and
personal charms that can entitle them to be ranked as Nature’s greatest
ornaments. Unmindful of this, however, they are too apt to consider
beauty as the only thing requisite in their sex; and since they are
endowed with it in such an eminent degree, they look down with disdain
on females less happy in personal charms. Beauty has undoubtedly great
influence over the hearts of mankind, but when it is overrun with
affectation and conceit, their admiration will soon be turned into
disgust; while women of more ordinary persons, but blessed with good
sense and good humour, will captivate the hearts of worthy men, and
more effectually secure their constancy.








THE PEACOCK AND THE CRANE.


The Peacock and the Crane having by chance met together, the Peacock
erected his tail, displayed his gaudy plumes, and looked with contempt
upon the Crane, as some mean ordinary person. The Crane resolving to
mortify his insolence, took occasion to say, that Peacocks were very
fine birds indeed, if fine feathers could make them so; but that he
thought it a much nobler thing to be able to rise above the clouds into
endless space, and survey the wonders of the heavens, as well as of the
earth beneath, with its seas, lakes, and rivers, as far as the eye can
reach, than to strut about upon the ground, and be gazed at by children.


APPLICATION.

There cannot be a greater sign of a weak mind, than a person’s valuing
himself on a gaudy outside, whether it consist of the beauties of the
person, or the still more contemptible vanity of fine cloaths. This
kind of misguided pride, while it endeavours to exalt, commonly tends
to lower the persons who are infected with it; but never renders them
so truly ridiculous as when it inspires them with a contempt of those
who have ten times more worth than themselves. To value ourselves
upon the glitter and finery of dress is one of the most trifling of
all vanities; and a man of sense would be ashamed to bestow upon it
the least attention. They who examine things by the scale of common
sense, must find something of weight and substance before they can be
persuaded to set a value upon it. The mind that is stored with virtuous
and rational sentiments, and the behaviour which is founded upon
complacency and humility, stamp a value upon the possessor, which all
men of discernment are ever ready to admire and acknowledge.








THE TWO POTS.


An earthen Pot, and one of brass, standing together upon the brink of
a river, were both carried away by the sudden rise of the water. The
earthen Pot shewed some uneasiness, fearing he should be broken; but
his companion of brass bade him be under no apprehension, as he would
take care of him. Oh! replies the other, keep as far off as you can, I
entreat you: it is you I am most afraid of; for whether the stream dash
you against me, or me against you, I am sure to be the sufferer, and,
therefore, I beg of you do not let us come near one another.


APPLICATION.

A man of moderate fortune, who is contented with what he has, and finds
he can live happily upon it, should be particularly guarded against
the ill-judged ambition of associating with the rich and powerful, for
what in them is œconomy, would in him be the height of extravagance;
and at the very time they honour him with their countenance, they are
leading him on to his ruin. People of equal conditions may float down
the current of life without hurting each other; but it is no easy
matter to steer one’s course in company with the great, so as to escape
without a bulge: neither is it desirable to live in the neighbourhood
of a very great man; for whether we ignorantly trespass upon him, or he
knowingly encroach upon us, we are sure to be the sufferers.








THE MOLE AND HER DAM.


The young Mole snuffed up her nose, and told her Dam she smelt an odd
kind of a smell. Bye and bye, O strange! says she, what a noise there
is in my ears, as if ten thousand hammers were going. A little after,
she was at it again: look, look, what is that I see yonder? it is just
like the flame of a fiery furnace. The Dam replied, pray child hold
your idle tongue; and if you would have us allow you any sense at all,
do not affect to shew more than nature has given you.


APPLICATION.

By affectation, we aim at being thought to possess some accomplishment
which we have not, or at shewing what we have, in a conceited
ostentatious manner. There is scarcely any species of ridiculous
behaviour, which is not derived from it; it grows out of folly and
insincerity; it derogates from genius; it is the bane of beauty, and
diminishes its charms; it is disagreeable to others, and hurtful to the
person who uses it; it detracts from some real possession, and makes
qualities that would otherwise pass well enough, appear nauseous and
offensive; and whoever indulges in it, may be sure to lay themselves
open, and call forth the attention of others to notice their vanity.
To cure ourselves of affectation, we have only to call in the aids of
truth and sincerity, which will cut off the whole train of its follies
at one stroke.








THE GOAT, THE KID, AND THE WOLF.


The Goat going abroad to feed, shut up her young Kid at home, charging
him to bolt the door fast, and open it to nobody till she herself
should return. The Wolf who lay lurking hard by, heard the charge
given, and soon after came and knocked at the door, counterfeiting the
voice of the Goat, and desired to be admitted. The Kid looking out at
the window, and finding the cheat, bade him go about his business, for,
however he might imitate a Goat’s voice, yet he appeared too much like
a Wolf to be trusted.


APPLICATION.

Deceit, hypocrisy, and villainy, are constantly on the watch to entrap
and ensnare the innocent and the unwary. Every beautiful woman is
commonly surrounded by a kind of men who would undermine her virtue;
and inexperienced men of fortune, in the outset of life, are almost
constantly beset with rogues and sharpers; and these artful villains,
under one specious pretext or another, too often effect the ruin of the
weak and unsuspicious of both sexes. As a guard against all these, the
early admonitions of parents are of inestimable worth: they are built
upon the tenderest regard, and the most sincere affection. Those who
have already travelled over the difficult paths of life, and buffeted
its storms, have observed the snares and the dangers with which the
way is strewed, and they are enabled by their experience, to forewarn
those who are about to launch out on the troubled ocean of life, to
steer their course clear of its hidden rocks, its shoals, and its
quick-sands. Did youth but know the importance of this early advice,
how eagerly would they treasure it in their minds, and as occasion
required, with what pleasure would they draw it forth, and obey its
dictates. To the neglect of these precepts, may be attributed much of
the ill conduct we see in the world, and most of the misfortunes which
befal mankind through life.

[Illustration:

  _Honour thy Father
  and thy mother
  that thy Days may be long
  in the land which
  The LORD thy God
  giveth Thee._
]






THE BROTHER AND SISTER.


A certain man had two children, a Son and a Daughter; the Boy very
handsome, and the Girl only moderately so. They were both young, and
happened to be one day playing near the looking-glass, which stood
on their mother’s toilet. The Boy, pleased with the novelty of the
thing, viewed himself for some time, and in a wanton roguish manner,
observed to the Girl how handsome he was. She resented it, and could
not bear the insolent manner in which he spoke, for she understood it
(as how could she do otherwise) to be intended as a direct affront to
her. Therefore she ran immediately to her Father, and with a deal of
aggravation, complained of her Brother, particularly of his having
acted so effeminate a part as to look in a glass, and meddle with
things which belonged to women only. The father embraced them both
with much tenderness and affection, and told them that he should
like to have them look in a glass every day: to the intent that you,
says he, addressing himself to the Boy, if you think that face of
yours handsome, may not disgrace and spoil it by an ugly temper, and
a foul behaviour; and that you, speaking to the girl, may make up for
the defects of your person, if there be any, by the sweetness of your
manners, and the agreeableness of your conversation.


APPLICATION.

We should every day view ourselves considerately in a looking-glass,
with the intent of converting it to a better purpose than that of
merely observing and admiring our persons. Let those on whom nature has
been liberal of her bounties, in bestowing a fine countenance, with
symmetry of person, health, and strength, always remember that these
are the gifts of providence, for which we ought ever to be thankful,
but never vain: these qualifications ought only to act as a spur to
induce us to cultivate the mind, by study, by reading, and reflection,
so as to cause it to correspond in its beauties with those of our
outward appearance. Let others again who have not any thing in their
personal appearance to attract the attention of the world, strive also
to improve the faculties of the mind, and to excel in the beauties of
a good temper, and an agreeable conversation, the charms of which,
notwithstanding a rough exterior, cannot fail to endear the possessor
to all men of sense, who will readily discover intrinsic worth, whether
it be made up of a lively imagination, clear perceptions, or the
transparent sincerity of an honest heart.






THE SHEEP-BITER.


A certain Shepherd had a Dog, upon whose fidelity he relied very much,
for whenever he had occasion to be absent himself, he committed the
care of his flock to the charge of this Dog; and to encourage him to do
his duty cheerfully, he fed him constantly with sweet milk and curds,
and sometimes threw him a bone extraordinary. Yet, notwithstanding
this, no sooner was his back turned, than the treacherous Cur fell upon
some one of the flock, and thus devoured the sheep instead of guarding
and defending them. The Shepherd having at length found out his tricks,
was resolved to hang him; and the Dog, when the rope was about his
neck, and he was just going to be tied up, began to expostulate with
his master, asking him why he was so unmercifully bent against him, who
was his own servant and creature, and had only committed a few crimes;
and why he did not rather take vengeance on the Wolf who was an open
and declared enemy? Nay, replied the Shepherd, it is for that very
reason that I think you ten times more worthy of death, for from him
I expected nothing but hostilities, and therefore could guard against
him; you I depended on as a just and faithful servant, and fed and
encouraged you accordingly, and therefore your treachery is the more
base, and your ungratitude the more unpardonable.


APPLICATION.

The common disappointments which we are liable to through life,
do not bring with them any thing to be compared to the bitterness
we experience from the perfidy of those we esteemed and trusted
as friends: an open enemy we can guard against, and we look upon
him when he is at rest, as we do at the sword within its scabbard;
but the man who betrays his trust, masked under the appearance of
friendship, wounds us in the tenderest part, and involves us in a
cruelly complicated grief, which frets the mind and heightens the sum
of our infelicity. Friendship is the cordial of human life, the balm
of society; and he who violates its laws, by treachery and deceit,
converts it into the deadliest poison, and renders that which ought to
be the defence and support of our steps, our greatest snare and danger.








THE OLD WOMAN AND HER MAIDS.


An Old Woman, who had several Maid Servants, used to call them up to
their work at the crowing of the Cock. The damsels, not liking to have
their sweet slumbers disturbed so early, combined together, and killed
the Cock, thinking they might then enjoy their warm beds a little
longer. But in this they found themselves mistaken, for the Old Woman,
having lost her unerring guide, from that time roused them out of their
beds whenever she awoke, although it might be at midnight.


APPLICATION.

We govern our lives by imagination rather than by judgment, mistaking
the reason of things, and imputing the issue of them to wrong causes.
We should endeavour to content ourselves in our present station, if it
be not very bad indeed, for it seldom happens that every thing can be
in all respects agreeable to our wishes. When we give full scope to the
impatience of our tempers, and quit our present condition in life, we
often find we have not changed for the better; but we are too fond of
carving out our fortunes for ourselves, and wish to remove this or that
obstacle which we imagine stands between us and our felicity: then,
too late, we see how greatly we are mistaken in our notions, when we
feel we have changed for the worse. Before we attempt any alteration of
moment, we should, if possible, ascertain what state it will produce,
and not suffer infirmity of temper to embitter our lives; but, above
all, we should never aim at mending our fortunes by fraud and violence.








HERCULES AND THE CARTER.


As a clownish Fellow was driving his cart along a deep miry lane, the
wheels stuck so fast in the clay, that his horses could not draw it
out. Upon this he fell a bawling and praying to Hercules to come and
help him. Hercules, looking down from a cloud, bid him not lie there
like an idle dastardly looby as he was, but get up and whip his horses,
and clap his shoulder stoutly to the wheel, adding that this was the
only way for him to obtain assistance.


APPLICATION.

The man who sits down at his ease, and prays to Heaven to have all
his wants supplied, and his wishes accomplished, by a miracle wrought
in his favour, without using his own exertions and honest endeavours
to obtain them, deserves to be disappointed. Many men who have a fair
share of natural good sense, and who also value themselves upon having
their reasoning powers enlightened by revelation, yet fall into this
error: led by fanatics and bigots, they follow the fashion of running
often to prayers and sermons, when they might be much better employed
at home. The industrious good man, instead of publicly praying for
the comforts of life, pursues his business, which is the proper means
of procuring them; and if at the same time he holds converse with his
Maker, which all men ought to do, and no man can be happy without
doing, he needs no veil of hypocrisy to make the world believe he is
better than he really is: he feels it his duty and pleasure so to
proceed, while he sojourns here, and knows not how he can do better,
than by sober and honest industry to provide for those of his own
household, and to endeavour for the means of helping him that needeth.
The man who is virtuously and honestly engaged, is actually serving
God all the while; and is more likely to have his silent wishes,
accompanied with strenuous endeavours, complied with by the Supreme
Being, than he who begs with an unnecessary vehemence, and solicits
with an empty hand--a hand which would be more religious, were it
usefully employed, and more devout, were it stretched out to do good to
those that want it.








THE EAGLE, THE CAT, AND THE SOW.


An Eagle had built her nest upon the top branches of an old oak; a
Wild Cat inhabited a hole in the middle; and in the hollow part at the
bottom was a Sow with a whole litter of Pigs. A happy neighbourhood,
and might long have continued so, had it not been for the wicked
insinuations of the designing Cat: for first of all, up she crept to
the Eagle, and, Good neighbour, says she, we shall all be undone; that
filthy Sow yonder does nothing but lie rooting at the foot of the
tree, and, as I suspect, intends to grub it up, that she may the more
easily come at our young ones. For my part, I will take care of my
own concerns, you may do as you please; but I will watch her motions,
though I stay at home this month for it. When she had said this, which
could not fail of putting the Eagle into a great fright, down she went,
and made a visit to the Sow at the bottom: putting on a sorrowful
face, I hope, says she, you do not intend to go abroad to-day: why not?
says the Sow: nay, replies the other, you may do as you please, but I
overheard the Eagle tell her young ones, that she would treat them with
a Pig the first time she saw you go out; and I am not sure but she may
take up with a Kitten in the mean time; so good morrow to you, you will
excuse me, I must go and take care of the little folks at home. Away
she went accordingly, and by contriving to steal out softly at nights
for her prey, and to stand watching and peeping all day at her hole,
as under great concern, she made such an impression upon the Eagle and
the Sow, that neither of them dared to venture abroad, for fear of the
other; the consequence of which was, that they in a little time were
starved, and their young ones fell a prey to the treacherous Cat and
her Kittens.


APPLICATION.

This shews us the ill consequence of giving ear to a gossiping
double-tongued neighbour. Many sociable well-disposed families have
been blown up into a perpetual discord, by one of these wicked
go-betweens; so that whoever would avoid the imputation of being a
bad neighbour, should guard both against receiving ill impressions by
hearsay, and uttering his opinions of others, to those busy bodies,
who, to gratify a malignant disposition, or gain some selfish end
of their own, can magnify a gnat to the size of a camel, or swell a
mole-hill to a mountain.






THE LARK AND HER YOUNG ONES.


A Lark who had Young Ones in a field of corn nearly ripe, was under
some fear lest the reapers should come and cut it down before her young
brood were fledged, and able to remove from the place; wherefore, when
she flew abroad in the morning to seek for food for them, she charged
them to listen to what the Farmer said about shearing. On her return,
her young family opened all their little throats at once, to inform her
that the Farmer had sent to his neighbours to reap the corn the next
morning. Is that all? said the old Lark, then there is no danger. When
she went abroad again the next morning, she left the same instructions
as before. At night, she found her Young Ones more alarmed than at
first; for the Farmer had applied to his friends, earnestly requesting
them to begin the harvest the next day. She received this intelligence
as calmly as before, and took no other precautions the next day, than
repeating the same orders. In the evening, they told her that the
Farmer had been charging his son to get the sickles ready, for it was
in vain to wait for other people, and that they would cut the corn
to-morrow themselves. Nay, then said the old Lark, we must be off as
soon as we can; for when a man undertakes to do his business himself,
it is not so likely that he will be disappointed.


APPLICATION.

He who depends on the assistance of others to perform what he is able
to do himself, must not be surprised to find that his business is
neglected. He may be sure that it will be best done when he puts forth
his own hands, and looks after it with his own eyes. How indeed can any
man imagine, that other people will be active in his interest, while he
himself remains indolent and unconcerned about his own affairs. Men of
such tempers and dispositions, live in a state of suspense, and subject
themselves to perpetual disappointments and losses, which their own
industry would have prevented, and have kept their minds at ease. They
do not use their reasoning powers, but sink down into a kind of stupid
abject dependence upon others, which degrades even the finest talents
with which human nature is dignified.






THE YOUNG MEN AND THE COOK.


Two Young Men went into a Cook’s shop, under pretence of buying some
meat; and while the Cook’s back was turned, one of them snatched up a
piece of beef, and gave it to his companion, who clapt it under his
cloak. The Cook turning about, and missing his beef, began to charge
them with it: upon which he that first took it swore bitterly he had
none of it. He that had it, swore as heartily that he had not taken it.
Why, look ye, gentlemen, says the Cook, I see your equivocation; and
though I cannot tell which of you has taken my meat, I am sure between
you there is a thief.


APPLICATION.

This fable shews how little reliance can be placed on either the word
or the oath of those who, like the thieves in the cook’s shop, have
neither honour nor honesty. An honest man’s word is as good as his
oath; and so is a rogue’s too: for he that will cheat and lie, will
not scruple to forswear himself. The former needs no oath to bind him;
and the latter, though he swear in the most solemn manner that can be
invented, only deceives you the more certainly, as he who scruples
not to steal, will never regard the heinous guilt of calling upon
the Supreme Being to witness his atrocity. It is no less wicked to
quibble and evade the truth, than it is to deny it altogether, for the
falsehood consists in what we wish the hearer to believe, not in the
literal import of what we say. Men who habituate themselves to this
species of deceit, will soon be ready to go the length of any perjury.
Early to impress the mind with the unspeakable worth of truth, is of
the utmost importance. It is sacred, and no man can say in the face of
the world, that it ought not to prevail. No discussions can injure its
cause--it emanates from heaven--it is an attribute of omnipotence, and
is therefore eternal.








THE MULE.


A Mule, which was pampered up and easily worked, became plump, sleek,
and in high condition, and in the height of his wantonness, would
scamper about from hill to dale in all the wildness of unbridled
restraint. Why should not I, said he to himself, be as good a racer as
any horse whatever? My father, whose pedigree was well known, was one
of the best of them; do not I resemble him in every respect? While he
was indulging his vanity in reveries of this kind, his master having
occasion to mount him upon urgent business, put him upon his speed,
and, ere long, was obliged to use both whip and spur to force him to
push forward. Thus jaded and tired, he muttered to himself, Alas! I
find now, I was mistaken in my pedigree, for my sire was not a Horse,
but an Ass.


APPLICATION.

The man who has been brought up in ease and affluence, and pampered and
anticipated in all his wants, little imagines what a figure he would
make in the world, were his supplies cut off, and he were put to the
trial to rub through its thorny mazes, and provide for himself. The
children of the poor industrious honest man, when brought up like their
parents, are put to a kind of school, such as the opulent it is feared
can seldom form any conception of; and if the former, by their industry
and abilities, rise above poverty, their enjoyments in life commonly
surpass those who have been, without effort, upheld in every real as
well as imaginary want. The sensible poor man does not trouble his head
about his pedigree, but he knows that his descent must of course be as
ancient as that of any man on earth; and that if he is respected in the
world, it must arise solely from his own good conduct and merit. The
man who has nothing to boast but the merely tracing back his ancestry,
is building upon a hollow foundation. If indeed his ancestry have
arisen to their high station by patriotic and virtuous means, and have
deservedly maintained a high character for probity, worth, and honour,
let him follow their example: if otherwise, all he can do or say will
only prove him to be a mongrel, or an ass.

    “The pride of family is all a cheat,
    “’Tis personal merit only makes us great.”






THE COCK AND THE JEWEL.


A gallant young Cock, in company with his mistresses, raking upon a
dung-hill for something to entertain them with, happened to scratch
up a Jewel. He knew what it was well enough, for it sparkled with
an exceeding bright lustre; but not knowing what to do with it, he
shrugged up his wings, shook his head, and putting on a grimace,
expressed himself to this purpose: Indeed, you are a very fine thing;
but I know not any business you have here. I make no scruple of
declaring, that my taste lies quite another way; and I had rather have
one grain of dear, delicious barley, than all the Jewels under the sun.


APPLICATION.

Moralists have interpreted this Fable in various ways, some of them
ascribing the want of setting a proper value upon the Jewel, to
ignorance, and say:--

    “To fools, the treasures dug from wisdom’s mine
    “Are Jewels thrown to Cocks, and Pearls to Swine.”

But the most obvious meaning of the Fable is surely to shew, that
men who weigh well their own real wants, and shape their pursuits to
their abilities, will always prefer those things which are necessary,
to such as are merely ornamental or superfluous, and will not easily
suffer themselves to be led astray by the gaudy allurements of glitter
and show, which have no other value than what vanity, pride, or luxury
may have set upon them; but governing their minds by their own reason,
judge of every thing by its intrinsic worth.








MERCURY AND THE WOODMAN.


A Man was felling a tree on the steep bank of a river, and by chance
let slip his hatchet, which dropt into the water, and sunk to the
bottom. Being in distress for want of his tool, he sat down and
bemoaned himself on the occasion. Upon this, Mercury appeared to him,
and being informed of the cause of his complaint, dived to the bottom
of the river, and coming up again, shewed the Man a golden hatchet,
demanding if that were his? he denied that it was: upon which Mercury
dived a second time, and brought up a silver one; the Man refused it,
alleging likewise that it was not his: he dived a third time, and
fetched up the individual hatchet the Man had lost; upon sight of
which the poor fellow was overjoyed, and took it with all humility and
thankfulness. Mercury was so pleased with his honesty, that he gave him
the other into the bargain, as a reward for his just dealing. Away
goes the Man to his companions, and giving them an account of what
had happened, one of them went presently to the river’s side, and let
his hatchet fall designedly into the stream. Then sitting down upon
the bank, he fell to weeping and lamenting as if he had been really
and sorely afflicted. Mercury appeared as before, and diving, brought
him up a golden hatchet, asking if that were the hatchet he had lost?
Transported at the precious metal, he answered yes, and went to snatch
it greedily; but the God, detesting his abominable impudence, not only
refused him that, but would not so much as let him have his own again.


APPLICATION.

Honesty is the best policy; and one of our best poets has further
stamped a value upon the good old maxim, by his assertion that “an
honest man is the noblest work of God.” The paths of truth and
integrity are so plain, direct, and easy, that the man who pursues
them, stands in no need of subtle contrivances to deceive the world. He
listens to the honest monitor within, and makes good his professions
with his practice: neither gold nor silver hatchets can make him
deviate from it; and whatever situation he may be placed in, he is sure
to meet the esteem of all men within the circle in which he moves, and
has besides the constant pleasure of feeling self-approbation within
his own breast.






THE FOX AND THE VIZOR MASK.


A Fox being in a shop where Vizor Masks were sold, laid his foot upon
one of them, and considering it awhile attentively, at last broke out
into this exclamation: Bless me! says he, what a handsome goodly figure
this makes! what a pity it is that it should want brains!


APPLICATION.

    The accomplished beau in air and mein how blest,
    His hat well fashioned, and his hair well drest,
    Is yet undrest within: to give him brains
    Exceeds his hatter’s or his barber’s pains.

This Fable is levelled at that numerous part of mankind, who, out of
their own ample fortunes take care to accomplish themselves in every
thing but common sense, and seem not even to bestow a thought upon
the important consequences of cultivating their understandings. The
smooth address and plausible behaviour of the varnished fop may indeed
pass current with the ignorant and superficial, but however much he
may value himself upon his birth or figure, he never fails exciting
the contempt or the pity of men of sagacity and penetration, and the
ridicule of those who are disposed to amuse themselves at the folly
and vanity of such as put on the mask of wisdom to cover their want of
brains.








THE THIEF AND THE DOG.


A Thief coming to rob a certain house in the night, was thwarted in his
attempts by a fierce vigilant Dog, who kept barking at him continually.
Upon which the Thief, thinking to stop his mouth, threw him a piece
of bread; but the Dog refused it with indignation, telling him that
before he only suspected him to be a bad man, but now upon his offering
to bribe him, his suspicions were fully confirmed; and that as he was
entrusted with the guardianship of his master’s house, he would never
cease barking while such a rogue was lurking about it.


APPLICATION.

Nothing can alter the honest purpose of him whose mind is embued with
good principles. He will despise an insidious bribe, and the greater
the offer which is designed to buy his silence, the louder and more
indignantly will he open out against the miscreant who would thus
practise upon him. He knows that the favours held out to him are not
marks of the love and regard of him who would confer them, but are
meant as the price at which he is to sell his honour and his virtue.
With a mind unpolluted, his noble resolution never fails to produce
the happiest consequences, by preserving his friends and himself from
the mischievous projects laid against them. So true it is, that virtue
is its own reward; while corruption and venality are sure in the end
to bring the greatest miseries on those, and their adherents, who are
so base, or perhaps inconsiderate, as to subject themselves to future
evils of the most fatal nature, for the sake of a little present profit.








THE MAN AND HIS GOOSE.


A certain Man had a Goose, which laid him a golden egg every day.
But not contented with this, which rather increased than abated his
avarice, he was resolved to kill the Goose, and cut up her belly,
that by so doing he might come at the inexhaustible treasure which he
fancied she had within her. He did so, and to his great sorrow and
disappointment, found nothing.


APPLICATION.

No passion can be a greater torment to those who are led by it, or more
frequently mistakes its aim, than insatiable covetousness. It makes
men blind to their present happiness, and conjures up ideal prospects
of increasing felicity, which often tempt its deluded votaries to
their ruin. Men who give themselves up to this propensity, know not
how to be contented with the constant and continued sufficiency with
which Providence may have blessed them: their minds are haunted with
the prospect of becoming rich, and their impatient craving tempers are
perpetually prompting them to try to obtain their object all at once.
They lose all present enjoyment in remotely contemplating the future;
and while they are shewing by their conduct how insensible they are
to the bounty of Providence, they are at the same time laying the
foundation of their own unhappiness.








THE WANTON CALF.


A Calf, which had been some time fattening in a rich pasture, full of
wantonness and arrogance, could not forbear insulting an old Ox every
time he saw him at the plough. What a sorry drudge art thou, says he,
to bear that heavy yoke, and draw all day a plough at thy tail! See,
what a fat, sleek, and comely appearance I make, and what a life of
ease I lead: I go where I please, and frisk about in the sunshine, or
lie down under the cool shade, just as my own fancy prompts me. The Ox,
not moved by this insolence, made no reply, but pursued his daily round
of alternate labour and rest, until he saw the Calf taken and delivered
to a priest, who immediately led him to the altar, and prepared to
sacrifice him. When the fatal knife was just at his throat, the Ox drew
near, and whispered him to this purpose: see what your wanton and lazy
life has brought you to, a premature and painful death.


APPLICATION.

We may learn by this Fable the general consequence of an idle life,
and how well rewarded laborious diligent men are in the end, when
they quietly enjoy the fruits of their industry. They who by little
tricks and chicanery, or by open violence and robbery, are enabled
to live in a high expensive way, often despise the poor honest man,
who is contented with the humble produce of his daily labour. But how
often is the poor man comforted, by seeing these wanton villains led
in disgrace and misery to the altar of justice, while he has many a
cheerful summer’s morning to enjoy abroad, and many a long winter’s
evening to indulge in at home, by a quiet hearth, and under an unenvied
roof: blessings, which often attend a sober industrious man, though
the idle and the profligate are utter strangers to them. Luxury and
intemperance, besides their inevitable tendency to shorten a man’s
days, are very apt to engage their besotted votaries in a debauched
life, not only prejudicial to their health, but which engenders in
them a contempt for those whose good sense and true taste of happiness
inspire them with an aversion to idleness and effeminacy, and put them
upon hardening their constitution by innocent exercise and laudable
employment. How many do gluttony and sloth tumble into an untimely
grave! while the temperate and the active drink sober draughts of
life, and spin out the thread of their existence to the most desirable
length.






THE BOASTING TRAVELLER.


One who had been abroad, was giving an account of his travels,
and among other places, said he had been at Rhodes, where he had
distinguished himself so much in leaping, an exercise which that city
was famous for, that not a Rhodian could come near him. When those
who were present did not seem to credit this relation so readily as
he intended they should, he took some pains to convince them of it by
oaths and protestations: upon which, one of the company told him he
need not give himself so much trouble about it, since he would put him
in a way to demonstrate the fact; which was, to suppose the place they
were in to be Rhodes, and to perform his extraordinary leap over again.
The boaster, not liking this proposal, sat down quietly, and had no
more to say for himself.


APPLICATION.

We had better be contented to keep our exploits to ourselves, than to
appear ridiculous by attempting to force a belief of that which is
improbable; and travelled gentlemen should have a care how they import
falsehoods and inventions of their own from foreign parts, and attempt
to vend them at home for staple truths. It cannot be too strongly
impressed upon the mind, that a lie is upon all occasions degrading
to the person who utters it, and should be most scrupulously avoided,
not only on account of its baseness, but because it is impossible to
foresee in how many troubles it may involve him who passes it off.
It will not always receive credit, and is ever liable to detection.
When it is calculated for wicked purposes, it will deservedly incur
punishment; and when it is of a harmless or insignificant nature, it
will even then often expose its author to contempt and ridicule; and
vanity never mistakes its end more grossly, than when it attempts to
aggrandize itself at the expence of truth.








THE SHEPHERD’S BOY AND THE WOLF.


A Shepherd’s Boy, while attending his flock, used frequently to
divert himself by crying out, “the Wolf! the Wolf!” The Husbandmen in
the adjoining grounds, thus alarmed, left their work and ran to his
assistance, but finding that he was only sporting with their feelings,
and bantering them, they resolved at last to take no notice of his
alarms. It was not long, however, before the Wolf really came, and the
Boy bawled out “the Wolf! the Wolf!” as he had done before; but the men
having been so often deceived, paid no attention to his cries, and the
sheep were devoured without mercy.


APPLICATION.

The man who would go through the world with reputation and success,
must preserve a religious adherence to truth: for no talents or
industry can give him weight with others, or induce the sensible part
of mankind to place any confidence in him, if he be known to deviate
without scruple from veracity. Men of this stamp soon become notorious;
and besides the ignominy which attaches to their characters, they have
to undergo the mortification of not being believed even when they
do speak the truth. Whatever misfortune may befal them, and however
sincere they may be in making known their distress, yet, like the boy
in the Fable, their complaints and most earnest asseverations cannot
procure them credit, and are received at best with doubt and suspicion.
The same consequences follow falsehood and deception, whether practised
by individuals or public governors, and they will both find in the end
that they have been guided by cunning, and not by wisdom: for although
the ignorant part of mankind may, to serve the temporary purposes of a
bad government, be acted upon by false alarms of imaginary dangers, yet
even these in time will see through the stale tricks and artifices of
those whose designs are to gull and impose upon them.

[Illustration:

  This Stone (like many
  10000000 of Men in the World)
  has held up its bare
  useless head for many
  Centuries past.
]






THE CROW AND THE PITCHER.


A Crow, ready to die with thirst, flew with joy to a Pitcher which he
beheld at some distance. When he came, he found water in it, indeed,
but so near the bottom, that with all his stooping and straining, he
was not able to reach it. He then endeavoured to overturn the Pitcher,
that at least he might be able to get a little of it; but his strength
was not sufficient for the accomplishment of this purpose. At last
seeing some pebbles lie near the place, he cast them one by one into
the Pitcher, and thus, by degrees, raised the water up to the very
brim, and satisfied his thirst.


APPLICATION.

What we cannot accomplish by strength, we may by ingenuity and
industry. A man of sagacity and penetration, upon meeting with a few
difficulties, does not drop his pursuits, but if he cannot succeed in
one way, sets his mind to work upon another, and does not hesitate
about stepping out of the old beaten track which had been thoughtlessly
pursued in a roundabout way by thousands before him. The present
state of the world, enlightened by arts and sciences, is a proof that
difficulties seemingly unsurmountable, and undertakings once imagined
to be impossible, have been accomplished; and this ought to be kept in
mind as a spur to continued exertion: for we are not acquainted with
the strength of our own minds till we exercise them, nor to what length
our abilities will carry us, till we put them to the trial.

    “What is discovered only serves to shew,
    That nothing’s known to what is yet to know.”

The man who enriches the present fund of knowledge with some new and
useful improvement, does an honour to himself, and ought invariably
to be rewarded by the public: for, like a happy adventurer by sea,
he discovers as it were an unknown land, and imports an additional
treasure to his own country.








THE PARTRIDGE AND THE COCKS.


A Man having caught a Partridge, plucked the feathers out of one of
its wings, and turned it into a little yard where he kept Game Cocks.
The Cocks led the poor bird a sad life, continually pecking at and
driving it away from the meat. This treatment was taken the more
unkindly, because offered to a stranger; and the Partridge could not
help concluding that they were the most uncivil inhospitable people he
had ever met with. But observing how very frequently they quarrelled
and fought with each other, he comforted himself with reflecting, that
it was no wonder they were so cruel to him, since they shewed the same
disposition to each other.


APPLICATION.

No peace is to be expected among those who are naturally fierce,
quarrelsome, and inhospitable; and people of a different disposition
should avoid, as much as possible, having any thing to do with them.
But when we cannot help coming into contact with such characters, there
is no remedy but patience; and this virtue a wise man will call to his
aid under every misfortune. When our sufferings are inflicted by the
wickedness of others, it is some consolation to reflect, that people
of this character are continually waging war among themselves, and
punishing each other; and that the consequences of their own wickedness
follow them like their shadow, besides rendering them the objects of
general aversion. No virtue was more universally practised, or more
strongly recommended, by the ancients, than a mild conduct to our
companions, and an hospitable entertainment of strangers; and when this
is not the general character of any people, it shews, in greater or
less degrees, the wretched state of society in which they live.








THE FOX AND THE CROW.


A Crow having taken a piece of meat out of a cottage window, flew
up into a tree with it; which a Fox observing, came underneath, and
began to compliment the Crow upon her beauty. I protest, says he, your
feathers are of a more delicate white than I ever saw in my life! Ah!
what a fine shape and graceful turn of body is there! and I make no
question but you have a tolerable voice: if it be but as fine as your
complexion, I do not know a bird that can stand in competition with
you. The Crow, tickled with this very civil language, wriggled about,
and hardly knew where she was; and having a mind to convince the Fox
in the matter of her voice, attempted to sing, and in the same instant
let the meat drop out of her mouth. This being what the Fox wanted,
he chopped it up in a moment, and trotted away, laughing at the easy
credulity of the Crow.


APPLICATION.

    “It is a maxim in the schools,
    That flattery is the food of fools.”

They that love flattery will have cause to repent of their foible
in the long run; and yet how few there are among the whole race of
mankind, who are proof against its attacks. The gross way in which it
is managed by some silly practitioners, is enough to alarm the dullest
apprehension; but let the ambuscade be disposed with judgment, and it
will scarcely fail of seizing the most guarded heart. How many are
tickled to the last degree with the pleasure of flattery, even while
they are applauded for their honest detestation of it. There is no
way to baffle the force of this engine, but by every one’s examining
impartially for himself, the true estimate of his own qualities. If he
deal sincerely in the matter, nobody can tell so well as himself, what
degree of esteem ought to attend any of his actions; and therefore he
should be entirely easy as to the opinion others have of them. If they
attribute more to him than is his due, they are either designing, or
mistaken; if they allow him less, they are envious, or possibly still
mistaken; and in either case are to be despised or disregarded: for he
that flatters without designing to make advantage of it, is a fool;
and whoever encourages that flattery which he has sense enough to see
through, is a vain coxcomb.






THE SENSIBLE ASS.


An old Man who was feeding his Ass in a fine green meadow, being
alarmed by the sudden approach of an enemy, began urging the Ass to put
himself forward, and fly with all the speed he was able. The Ass asked
him whether he thought the enemy would clap two pair of panniers upon
his back? The Man said, No, there was no fear of that. Why then, says
the Ass, I will not stir an inch, for what is it to me who my master
is, since I shall but carry my panniers as usual.


APPLICATION.

This Fable shews us how much in the wrong the poorer sort of people
most commonly are, when they are under any concern about the
revolutions of a government. All the alteration which they can feel, is
perhaps in the name of their sovereign, or some such important trifle;
but they cannot well be poorer, or made to work harder, than they did
before. And yet how are they sometimes imposed upon and drawn in by
the artifices of a few mistaken or designing men, to foment factions,
and raise rebellions, in cases where they can get nothing by success;
but if they miscarry, are in danger of suffering an ignominious and
untimely end.








THE SWALLOW AND OTHER BIRDS.


A Swallow, observing a Farmer sowing his field with flax, called the
Birds together, and informed them what he was about. She told them that
flax was the material of which the thread was made that composed the
fowler’s nets, so fatal to the feathered race, and strongly advised
them to assist her in picking up the seed, and destroying it. The Birds
heard her with indifference, and gave themselves no trouble about the
matter. In a little time the flax sprung up, and appeared above the
ground. She then put them in mind once more of their impending danger,
and wished them to pluck it up in the bud, before it grew any farther.
But they still slighted her warnings, and the flax grew up into stalk.
She again urged them to attack it, for it was not yet too late; but
they only ridiculed her for a silly pretending prophet. The Swallow,
finding all her remonstrances availed nothing, was resolved to leave
the society of such careless unthinking creatures, before it was too
late: so quitting the woods, she repaired to the houses; and, forsaking
the conversation of the Birds, has ever since taken up her abode among
the dwellings of men.


APPLICATION.

Wise men read effects in their causes, and profit by them; but their
advice is thrown away when given to the arrogant and self-conceited,
who are too proud to listen to it. It is equally lost upon fools, who
stupidly or obstinately shut their eyes against impending danger,
till it is too late to prevent it. In both cases, those who have no
foresight of their own, and those who despise the wholesome admonitions
of their friends, deserve to suffer from the misfortunes which their
own obstinacy, folly, or negligence, brings upon their heads. A great
portion of mankind, from an overweening conceit of their own abilities,
are unwilling to be advised by any one, and through this stubborn
disposition, deprive themselves of the aids of friendship, and the
benefits which the good-will of their more sensible neighbours would
have conferred on them with pleasure.








THE THIEVES AND THE COCK.


Two Thieves broke into a house with a design to rob it; but when they
had pried into every corner, found nothing worth taking away but a
Cock, which they seized upon and carried off. When they were about to
kill him, he begged very hard that they would spare his life, putting
them in mind how useful he was to mankind, by crowing and calling them
up betimes to their work. You villain, replied they, it is for that
very reason we will wring your head off; for you alarm and keep the
people waking, so that we cannot rob in quiet for you.


APPLICATION.

The same thing which recommends us to the esteem of good people, will
make those that are bad have nothing but hatred and ill-will towards
us; for every man who has engaged himself in a vicious or wicked
course of life, fiend-like, makes himself, as it were, the natural
adversary of virtue. It is in vain for innocent men, under oppression,
to complain to those who are the occasion of it: all they can urge
will but make against them; and even their very innocence, though
they should say nothing, would render them sufficiently suspected.
The moral, therefore, that this Fable brings along with it, is to
inform us that there is no trusting, nor any hopes of living well,
with wicked unjust men; for their disposition is such, that they will
do mischief to others as soon as they have the opportunity. When vice
flourishes, and is in power, were it possible for a good man to live
quietly in its neighbourhood, and preserve his integrity, it might be
sometimes perhaps convenient for him to do so, rather than quarrel
with and provoke it against him. But as it is certain that rogues are
irreconcileable enemies to men of worth, if the latter would be secure,
they must take methods to free themselves from the power and society of
the former.








THE WOLVES AND THE SICK ASS.


An Ass being sick, the report was spread abroad in the country, and
some did not scruple to say, that she would die before another night
went over her head. Upon this, several Wolves went to the stable where
she lay, under pretence of making her a visit; but rapping at the door,
and asking how she did, the young Ass came out, and told them that his
mother was much better than they desired.


APPLICATION.

If the kind enquiries after the sick were all to be interpreted with as
much frankness as those in the Fable, the porters of the great might
commonly answer with the strictest propriety, that their masters were
much better than was wished or desired. The charitable visits which
are made to many sick people, proceed from much the same motive with
that which induced the hungry Wolves to make their enquiries after
the sick Ass, namely, that they may come in for some share of their
remains, and feast themselves upon the reversion of their goods and
chattels. The sick man’s heir longs for his estate; one friend waits
in anxious expectation of a legacy, and another wants his place; it,
however, does not unfrequently happen, that the mask of these selfish
visitants, and their counterfeit sorrow, are seen through, and their
impertinent officiousness treated with the contempt it so justly
deserves.

[Illustration: ’Tis \the\ a world! floating about, like an illumined
mote, in the immensity of endless space--and is inhabited by nations of
proud pismires.--]






THE DOG IN THE MANGER.


A Dog was lying upon a stall full of hay. An Ox, being hungry, came
near, and offered to eat of the hay; but the ill-natured Cur getting up
and snarling at him, would not suffer him to touch it. Upon which the
Ox, in the bitterness of his heart, said, A curse light on thee for a
malicious wretch, who will neither eat hay thyself, nor suffer others
to do it.


APPLICATION.

There are men in the world of so snarling, malevolent, and ill-natured
a disposition, that they will even punish themselves, rather than
put forth a finger to serve any one. It gives them a malignant kind
of pleasure to have it in their power to cause trouble and vexation
to others, whenever they have an opportunity of doing so; and could
they have their will, they would shut out the light and warmth of
the sun, and suffer the fruits of the earth to rot upon it, provided
they could see those about them unhappy; and in thus taking delight
in other people’s miseries, it of course follows that they are their
own tormentors. These characters, in common life, are diabolical and
detestable; but the evils they inflict, are only like a drop to the
ocean, when compared to those which men of the same stamp shed abroad
in the world, when, in an evil hour, they happen to be exalted to
govern the affairs of a nation. Then, indeed, their baleful influence
is felt in every direction: they may be termed fiends in human shape;
for, as far as they are able, they thwart the benevolent intentions of
Omnipotence, and the very breath of their nostrils seems to blast the
happiness of mankind.








JUPITER AND THE ASS.


An Ass which had been some time in the service of a Gardener, and
carried his vegetables to market, became tired of his place, and
petitioned Jupiter that he would permit him to enter upon the service
of a neighbouring Potter. Jupiter granted his request. He here,
however, soon found that the latter loaded him with heavier burthens,
and kept him on poorer fare than he had been used to before. He again
prayed to Jupiter to grant that he might be allowed to better his
condition by engaging himself to a Tanner. Jupiter again heard his
prayer; but here he soon found he had changed for the worse: for,
besides being hard worked, he was also often cruelly treated; and
seeing what was going on in this place, he could not forbear upbraiding
himself with his folly and inconstancy. Oh, tofo that I was! said he to
himself, for leaving my former mild master, to become the servant of
one, who, after working me to death, will not spare my very hide after
I am dead.


APPLICATION.

The man that carries about with him the plague of a restless mind, can
never be pleased; he is ever shifting and changing, and is in truth
not so weary of his condition as of himself. Seldom or never contented
with his lot, he is ever hunting after happiness where it is not to
be found, without ever looking for it where it is. He indulges in the
strange propensity of his nature, which leads him to suppose that his
own lot is the most miserable, and therefore concludes that any change
he can make must be for the better. He loses sight of the virtues of
patience, constancy, and resignation, and seems not to know that every
station in life has its real or imaginary inconveniences; and that
it is better to bear with those which we are accustomed to endure,
and of which we know the utmost extent, than by aiming at the seeming
advantages of another way of life, to subject ourselves to all its
hidden miseries.








ÆSOP AND THE IMPERTINENT FELLOW.


Æsop having occasion to go out to seek a light to kindle his fire, went
from house to house for some time before he could succeed; but having
at last got what he wanted, he posted back in haste with his lighted
candle in his hand. An impudent Fellow, leaving his companions, caught
hold of Æsop by the sleeve, and would fain have shewn off his wit, and
been arch upon him. Hey day! oh, rare Æsop! says he, what occasion for
a candle, old boy! what, are you going to light the sun to bed? Let me
alone, says Æsop, for with it I am looking for an honest man.


APPLICATION.

It is plain that our old philosopher in the Fable did not take the
impertinent fellow for an honest man, and he gave him to understand
that it required a good light to find out one who fully came up to
that character; and he might have added, that the world very much
abounded with ignorant and impudent ones, who, with their empty
nonsense, which they call wit, often unseasonably interrupt men of
thought and business: for to those whose minds are wholly intent upon
matters of importance, nothing is so offensive as the intrusion of a
fool. Men of eminent parts and great natural abilities, make their
appearance in the world only now and then. These qualifications are
the gift of Providence, and seem to be intended to throw fresh lights
on the understandings of mankind; but in all the gradations from these
downwards, it is in the power of every one to improve their manners,
and integrity is within the reach of those of the meanest capacity, if
they will endeavour to amend their lives, and take it for their guide.








THE FORESTER AND THE LION.


The Forester meeting with the Lion one day, they discoursed together
for a while without much differing in opinion. At last, a dispute
happening to arise about the point of superiority between a Man and a
Lion, the former wanting a better argument, shewed the latter a marble
monument, on which was placed the statue of a Man striding over a
vanquished Lion. If this, says the Lion, is all you have to say for it,
let us be the sculptors, and we will make the Lion striding over the
Man.


APPLICATION.

Such is the partiality of mankind in favour of themselves and their
own actions, that it is extremely difficult, nay almost impossible
to come at any certainty, by reading the accounts that are written
on one side only. The simple truth is still perverted, as prejudice,
vanity, or interest warps the mind, and it is not discovered in all
its brilliancy, till the mists which obscure it are swept away by the
most rigid investigation. In what an odious light would our party men
place each other, if the transactions of the times were handed down
to posterity by a warm zealot on either side; and were such records
to survive a few centuries, with what perplexities and difficulties
would they embarrass the historian, as by turns he consulted them for
the character of his great forefathers. The same difficulties would
occur in writing the history of nations, both ancient and modern. Some
of those who flourish at this day, and consider themselves as having
reached perfection in civilization and polished manners, will perhaps,
not unjustly, be branded in after-times with cruelty, injustice,
and oppression, in having confounded all simplicity of manners, and
disturbed the peace of whole nations, by carrying the horrors of
war, of murder, and desolation, into regions formerly blessed with
uninterrupted tranquillity.








THE WOLF, THE FOX, AND THE APE.


The Wolf indicted the Fox for felony before the Ape, who upon that
occasion was appointed special judge of the cause. The Fox gave in his
answer to the Wolf’s accusation, and denied the fact. After hearing
both sides, the Ape, penetrating the character of the parties, gave
judgment to this purpose: I am of opinion, that you, says he to the
Wolf, never lost the goods you sue for; and as for you, turning to the
Fox, I make no question but you at least have stolen what is laid to
your charge. And thus the court was dismissed with this public censure
upon each party.


APPLICATION.

Well may both judge and jury, in the outset of trial, be puzzled to
decide between and do justice to men whose quarrels are made up of
baseness and villainy, and carried on with mutual treachery, fraud,
and violence, and whose witnesses are perhaps of the same character
with themselves. Each party may justly enough accuse the other, though
neither of them are worthy of belief, and deserve even no credit for
the imputations with which they asperse each other’s characters. But
such men need not hope long to deceive the world: a penetrating judge
and an honest jury will, upon sifting the matter, clearly see what kind
of men they have been occupying their attention with, and shew a proper
disgust at the wicked impudence of both plaintiff and defendant.








THE BALD KNIGHT.


A certain Knight growing old, his hair fell off, and he became bald;
to hide which imperfection he wore a periwig. But as he was riding out
with some others a hunting, a sudden gust of wind blew off the periwig,
and exposed his bald pate. The company could not forbear laughing at
the accident; and he himself laughed as loud as any body, saying, how
was it to be expected that I could keep strange hair upon my head, when
my own would not stay there?


APPLICATION.

There is no disposition, or turn of mind, which on many occasions
contributes more to keep us easy, than that which enables us to rally
any of our failings, or joke upon our own infirmities: this blunts
the edge, and baffles and turns aside the malignant sneers of little
wits, and the ill nature and ridicule of others. If we should at any
time happen to incur the laughter of those about us, we cannot stifle
it sooner or better than by receiving it all with a cheerful look,
and by an ingenuous and pleasant remark, parry the jest which another
is ready to throw out at our expence. To appear fretted or nettled,
only serves to gratify the wishes of those who take a secret pleasure
in seeing such an effect produced; and, besides, a testy or captious
temper is a source of perpetual disquietude, both to ourselves and our
acquaintances, and like a little leaven, sours the whole mass of our
good qualities. If we had no other imperfections, this of itself would
be sufficient to cause our company to be shunned.








THE LION AND THE FOUR BULLS.


Four Bulls, who had entered into a very strict friendship, kept always
near one another, and fed together. The Lion often saw them, and as
often had a mind to make one of them his prey; but though he could
easily have subdued any of them singly, yet he was afraid to attack
the whole alliance, knowing they would have been too powerful for him,
and therefore was obliged to keep himself at a distance. At last,
perceiving that no attempt was to be made upon them as long as their
combination lasted, he artfully contrived, by the whispers and hints of
his emissaries, to foment jealousies, and raise divisions among them.
This stratagem succeeded so well, that the Bulls grew cold and reserved
to one another, which soon after ripened into a downright hatred and
aversion, and at last ended in a total separation. The Lion had now
attained his ends; and though it had been impossible for him to hurt
them while they were united, he found no difficulty, now they were
parted, to seize and devour every Bull of them, one after another.


APPLICATION.

Since friendships and alliances are of the greatest importance to our
well-being and happiness, we cannot be too often cautioned against
suffering them to be broken by tale bearers and whisperers, or by
any dark plots and contrivances of our enemies: for when by such
wicked means as these, or by our own imprudence, we lose a friend,
we shake the very basis of our interest, and remove the pillar that
contributed to support it. Whatever in cases of this kind is applicable
to individuals, is equally so to kingdoms and states; and it is as
undisputed a maxim as ever was urged upon the attention of mankind, by
the best man that ever lived, that a “kingdom divided against itself
cannot stand:” the people are invincible when united.

    Faction and feuds will overturn the state
    Which union renders flourishing and great.








THE OLD MAN AND HIS SONS.


An old Man had several Sons, who were constantly quarrelling with each
other, notwithstanding he used every means in his power to persuade
them to cease their contentions, and to live in amity together. At last
he had recourse to the following expedient:--He ordered his Sons to
be called before him, and a bundle of sticks to be brought, and then
commanded them to try if, with all their strength, any of them could
break it. They all tried, but without effect: for the sticks being
closely and compactly bound together, it was impossible for the force
of man to break them. After this, the Father ordered the bundle to be
untied, and gave a single stick to each of his Sons, at the same time
bidding them try to break it. This they did with ease, and soon snapped
every stick asunder. The Father then addressed them to this effect: O,
my Sons, behold the power of unity! for if you, in like manner, would
but keep yourselves strictly conjoined in the bands of friendship, it
would not be in the power of any mortal to hurt you; but when you are
divided by quarrels and animosities, you fall a prey to the weakest
enemies.


APPLICATION.

A kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and the
same holds good in all societies and corporations of men, from the
constitution of the nation, down to every little parochial vestry.
Every private family should consider itself a little state, in which
the several members ought to be united by one common interest. Quarrels
with each other are as fatal to their welfare, as factions are
dangerous to the peace of the commonwealth. But indeed the necessity
of union and friendship extends itself to all kinds of relations in
life, and they conduce mightily to the advantage of those who cherish
and cultivate them. No enemy will dare to attack a body of men firmly
attached to each other, and will fear to offend one of the number,
lest he should incur the resentment of the rest; but if they split
into parties, and are disunited by quarrels, every petty opponent will
venture to attack them, and the whole fraternity will be liable to
wrongs and violence.








THE LION, THE TIGER, AND THE WOLF.


A Lion and a Tiger, at the same instant seized on a young Fawn, which
they immediately killed. This they had no sooner performed, than they
fell to fighting, in order to decide whose property it should be. The
battle was so obstinate, that they were both compelled, by weariness
and loss of blood, to desist and lie down breathless and quite
disabled. A Wolf passing that way, perceiving how the case stood, very
impudently stepped up and seized the booty, which they had all this
while been contending for, and carried it off. The two combatants, who
beheld this without being able to prevent it, could only make this
reflection: How foolish, said they, has been our conduct! Instead of
being contented, as we ought, with our respective shares, our senseless
rage has rendered us unable to prevent this rascally Wolf from robbing
us of the whole.


APPLICATION.

When people go to law about an uncertain title, and have spent the
value of their whole estate in the contest, nothing is more common
than to find that some unprincipled attorney has secured the object
in dispute to himself. The very name of law seems to imply equity and
justice, and that is the bait which has drawn in many to their ruin.
If we would lay aside passion, prejudice, and folly, and think calmly
of the matter, we should find that going to law is not the best way
of deciding differences about property; it being, generally speaking,
much safer to trust to the arbitration of two or three honest sensible
neighbours, than at a vast expence of money, time, and trouble, to run
through the tedious frivolous forms, with which, by the artifices of
greedy lawyers, a court of judicature is contrived to be attended. Or
if a case should happen to be so intricate that a man of common sense
cannot distinguish who has the best title, how easy would it be to have
the opinion of the best counsel in the land, and agree to abide by his
decision. If it should appear dubious, even after that, how much better
would it be to divide the thing in dispute, rather than go to law, and
hazard the losing, not only of the whole, but costs and damages into
the bargain!






THE FOX WITHOUT A TAIL.


A Fox being caught in a trap, escaped after much difficulty with the
loss of his tail. He was, however, a good deal ashamed of appearing in
public without this ornament, and at last, to avoid being singular and
ridiculous in the eyes of his own species, he formed the project of
calling together an assembly of Foxes, and of persuading them that the
docking of their tails was a fashion that would be very agreeable and
becoming. Accordingly he made a long harangue to them for that purpose,
and endeavoured chiefly to shew the awkwardness and inconvenience of a
Fox’s tail, adding that they were quite useless, and that they would be
a very great deal better without them. He asserted, that what he had
only conjectured and imagined before, he now found by experience to be
true, for he never enjoyed himself so much, and found himself so easy
as he had done since he cut off his tail. He then looked round with a
brisk air, to see what proselytes he had gained; when a sly old Fox
in company answered him, with a leer: I believe you may have found a
convenience in parting with your tail, and perhaps when we are in the
same circumstances, we may do so too.


APPLICATION.

Many of the fashions which obtain in the world, originate in the whim
or caprice of some vain conceited creature, who takes a pride in
leading the giddy multitude in a career of folly. Others again take
their rise from an artful design to cover some vice, or hide some
deformity in the person of the inventor. Projectors and planners of a
higher stamp are also not uncommon in the world. These men appear to
toil only for the public good, and the sacred name of patriotism is
their shield. It, however, often happens that when their deep schemes
are opened out, they are found to proceed from nothing better than
self-interested motives, and a sincere desire to serve themselves.








THE MISER AND HIS TREASURE.


A certain Miser, having got together a large sum of money, sought
out a sequestered spot, where he dug a hole and hid it. His greatest
pleasure was to go and look upon his treasure; which one of his
servants observing, and guessing there was something more than ordinary
in the place, came at night, found the hoard, and carried it off. The
next day, the Miser returning as usual to the scene of his delight,
and perceiving the money gone, tore his hair for grief, and uttered
the most doleful accents of despair. A neighbour, who knew his temper,
overhearing him, said, Cheer up, man! thou hast lost nothing: there is
still a hole to peep at: and if thou canst but fancy the money there,
it will do just as well.


APPLICATION.

Of all the appetites to which human nature is subject, none is so
lasting, so strong, and so unaccountable, as avarice. Other desires
generally cool at the approach of old age; but this flourishes under
grey hairs, and triumphs amidst infirmities. All our other longings
have something to be said in excuse for them; but it is above reason,
and therefore truly incomprehensible, why a man should be passionately
fond of money only for the sake of gazing upon it. His treasure is as
useless to him as a heap of oyster shells; for though he knows how
many substantial pleasures it might procure, yet he dares not touch
it, and is as destitute, to all intents and purposes, as the man who
is not worth a groat. This is the true state of a covetous person, to
which one of that fraternity perhaps may reply, that when we have said
all, since pleasure is the grand aim of life, if there arise a delight
to some, from the bare possession of riches, though they do not use,
or even intend to use them, we may be puzzled how to account for it,
and think it strange, but ought not absolutely to condemn those who
thus closely, but innocently, pursue what they esteem the greatest
happiness. True! people would be in the wrong to paint covetousness in
such odious colours, were it compatible with innocence. But here arises
the mischief: a covetous man will stop at nothing to attain his ends;
and when once avarice takes the field, honesty, charity, humanity, and
every virtue which opposes it, are sure to be put to the rout.






THE SHIP DOG.


A young saucy Dog, having been found not to like any employment at
home, was taken by a sea captain on board his ship, where, being well
fed, he soon became both stout and fierce, and shewed himself off as
such in every foreign port. He no sooner got ashore, than he held up
his leg against every post and corner, and scraped the ground with his
feet, quite regardless what dog he might bespatter; and if any of them
happened to look sulkily at him, he thought nothing of seizing upon
and rolling them in the kennel. If he happened to fall into company,
he always began to give himself airs, to talk big, and to express his
contempt for the dogs of the place. He would boast that he was from
a better country, and belonged to a better family than any dog among
them. In short, said he, “I come from Cheviot, the highest mountain in
the world, and the very heart of all England, where my forefathers,
thousands of years ago, assembled to hunt the Wild Bull, the Wolf, and
the Boar.” He was once going on at this rate, when he was interrupted
by a sedate, experienced Bitch, who assured him that there were good
dogs and bad dogs in every country, and that the only difference arose
from their education; that many of the forefathers he boasted of, had
long since worried each other, and the remainder of them had become so
troublesome, that part had been transported across the sea to another
place; and she knew, from good authority, that both his father and his
mother were hanged.


APPLICATION.

When foreigners speak slightingly of the country they happen to be in,
and praise their own, it shews in them a want of good sense and good
breeding. It is indeed natural to have an affection for one’s native
land, nor can we help preferring it to every other; but to express this
in another country, to people whose opinion it must needs contradict,
by the same rule that it is conformable to our own, cannot fail of
giving them just offence. It matters not how highly some particular
countries may stand in the estimation of the rest of the world: this
has little to do with private individuals; the advantage of having
been born in one of those favoured countries, is accidental, and no
man ought to be esteemed merely on that account. In order to merit the
respect of virtuous and wise men in every foreign land, it must appear
to them that by our talents, our acquirements, and our patriotism, we
do credit to the country which gave us birth.






THE GOAT AND THE LION.


The Lion, seeing a Goat upon a steep craggy rock, where he could not
come at him, asked him what delight he could take to skip from one
precipice to another all day, and venture the breaking of his neck
every moment? I wonder, says he, you will not come down and feed on the
plain here, when there is such plenty of grass, and fine sweet herbs.
Why, replies the Goat, I cannot but say your opinion is right; but you
look so very hungry and designing, that, to tell you the truth, I do
not care to venture my person where you are.


APPLICATION.

Advice, though good in itself, is to be suspected when it is given
by a tricking, self-interested man. Perhaps we should take upon
ourselves not only a very great, but an unnecessary trouble, if we
were to suspect every man who offers to advise us; but this however
is necessary, that when we have reason to question any one in point
of honour and justice, we not only consider well before we suffer
ourselves to be persuaded by him, but even resolve to have nothing to
do in any affair where such treacherous slippery sparks are concerned,
if we can avoid it without much inconvenience.








THE TWO TRAVELLERS.


Two Men travelling upon the road, one of them saw an Axe lying upon
the ground, where somebody had been hewing timber: so taking it up,
says he, I have found an Axe. Do not say I, says the other, but we have
found; for as we are companions, we ought to share the value between
us: but the first would not consent. They had not gone far, before the
owner of the Axe, hearing what was become of it, pursued them with a
warrant; which, when the fellow that had it, perceived, Alas! says he
to his companion, we are undone. Nay, says the other, do not say we,
but I am undone: for, as you would not let me share the prize, neither
will I share the danger with you.


APPLICATION.

We cannot reasonably expect those to bear a part in our ill-fortune,
whom we never permitted to share in our prosperity; and whoever is so
over-selfish and narrow-minded, as to exclude his friend from a portion
of the benefits to which an intimate connection entitles him, may,
perhaps, engross some petty advantages to himself, but he must lay his
account on being left to do as well as he can for himself in times of
difficulty and distress. The very life and soul of friendship subsist
upon mutual benevolence, and in conferring and receiving obligations
on either hand, with a free, open, and unreserved behaviour, without
the least tincture of jealousy, suspicion, or distrust, guided by a
strict observance of the rules of honour and generosity; and as no
man includes within himself every thing necessary for his security,
defence, preservation, and support, these rules are the requisites of
friendship, to make it firm and lasting, and the foundation on which it
must be built.








THE FOX AND THE ASS.


An Ass finding a Lion’s skin, disguised himself in it, and ranged
about the forest, putting all the beasts in bodily fear. After he had
diverted himself thus for some time, he met a Fox, and being desirous
to frighten him too, as well as the rest, he leapt at him with some
fierceness, and endeavoured to imitate the roaring of a Lion. Your
humble servant, says the Fox, if you had held your tongue, I might have
taken you for a Lion, as others did, but now you bray, I know who you
are.


APPLICATION.

A man is known by his words, as a tree is by the fruit; and if we
would be apprized of the nature and qualities of any one, let him
but discourse, and he will speak them to us better than another can
describe them. We may therefore perceive, from this Fable, how proper
it is for those to hold their tongues, who would not discover the
shallowness of their understandings. “Empty vessels make the greatest
sound,” and the deepest rivers are most silent; the greatest noise
is ever found where there is the least depth of water. It is a true
observation, that those who are the weakest in understanding, and most
slow of apprehension, are generally the most precipitate in uttering
their crude conceptions. Grave looks, an aspect of dignity, and a
solemn deportment, may sometimes deceive even an accurate observer; but
wise discourse cannot be successfully counterfeited or assumed, and the
sententious blockhead is as easily recognised as the pert coxcomb. It
matters not what disguise one of these may assume; he utters himself,
and undeceives us: he brays, and tells the whole company what he is.








THE CAT AND THE FOX.


As the Cat and the Fox were once talking politics together, in the
middle of a forest, Reynard said, let things turn out ever so bad, he
did not care, for he had a thousand tricks for them yet, before they
should hurt him; but pray, says he, Mrs Puss, suppose there should be
an invasion, what course do you design to take? Nay, says the Cat, I
have but one shift for it, and if that won’t do, I am undone. I am
sorry for you, replies Reynard, with all my heart, and would gladly
furnish you with one or two of mine; but indeed neighbour, as times go,
it is not good to trust, we must even be every one for himself, as the
saying is, and so your humble servant. These words were scarcely out of
his mouth, when they were alarmed with a pack of hounds, that came upon
them in full cry. The Cat, by the help of her single shift, ran up a
tree and sat securely among the branches, whence she beheld Reynard,
who had not been able to get out of sight, overtaken with his thousand
tricks, and torn into as many pieces by the Dogs, which had surrounded
him.


APPLICATION.

One good discreet expedient made use of upon an emergency, will do
a man more real service, and make others think better of him, than
to have passed all his life for a shrewd crafty fellow, full of his
stratagems and expedients, and valuing himself upon his having a deeper
knowledge of the world than his neighbours. Plain good sense, and a
downright honest meaning, are a better guide through life, and more
trusty security against danger, than the low shifts of cunning, and the
refinements of artifice. Cunning is of a deep entangling nature, and
is a sign of a small genius; though when it happens to be successful,
it often makes an ostentatious pretension to wisdom; but simplicity of
manners is the ally of integrity, and plain common sense is the main
requisite of wisdom.








THE DOG INVITED TO SUPPER.


A Gentleman having invited several friends to supper, his Dog thought
this a fit opportunity to invite another Dog, an intimate of his own,
to partake with him of the good cheer, in the kitchen. Accordingly the
stranger punctually attended, and seeing the mighty preparations going
forward, promised himself a most delicious repast. He began to smell
about, and, with his eyes intent upon the victuals, to lick his lips,
and wag his tail. This drew the attention of the Cook, who stole slyly
up, and seizing him by the hind legs, whirled him out of the window
into the street. The Dog, stunned and hurt by his hard fall on the
pavement, began to howl, the noise of which drew several Dogs about
him, who knowing of the invitation, began to enquire how he had fared?
O! charmingly, said he; only I ate and drank till I scarce knew which
way I came out of the house.


APPLICATION.

There is no depending upon a second-hand interest; unless we know
ourselves to be well with the principal, and are assured of his favour
and protection, we stand upon a slippery foundation. They are strangers
to the world who are so weak as to think they can be well with any
one by proxy; they may by this means be cajoled, bubbled, and imposed
upon, but are under great uncertainty as to gaining their point, and
may probably be treated with scorn and derision in the end. Yet there
are not wanting among the several species of fops, silly people of this
sort, who pride themselves in an imaginary happiness, from being in
the good graces of a great man’s friend’s friend. Alas! the great men
themselves are but too apt to deceive and fail in making good their
promises, how then can we expect any good from those who do but promise
and vow in their names? To place a confidence in such sparks, is
indeed so false a reliance, that we ought to be ashamed to be detected
in it; and, like the Dog in the Fable, rather own we had been well
treated, than let the world see how justly we had been punished for our
ridiculous credulity.








THE ANGLER AND THE LITTLE FISH.


An Angler caught a small Trout, and as he was taking it off the hook,
and going to put it into his basket, it opened its little throat, and
begged most piteously that he would throw it into the river again. The
man demanded what reason it had to expect this indulgence? Why, says
the Fish, because I am so young and so little, that it is not worth
your while taking me now, and certainly I shall be better worth your
notice, if you take me a twelvemonth afterwards, when I shall be grown
a great deal larger. That may be, replied the Angler, but I am sure of
you now; and I am not one of those who quit a certainty in expectation
of an uncertainty.


APPLICATION.

They who neglect the present opportunity of reaping a small advantage,
in the hope that they shall obtain a greater afterwards, are far from
acting upon a reasonable and well advised foundation. We ought never
thus to deceive ourselves, and suffer the favourable moment to slip
away; but secure to ourselves every fair advantage, however small, at
the moment that it offers, without placing a vain reliance upon the
visionary expectation of something better in time to come. Prudence
advises us always to lay hold of time by the forelock, and to remember
that “a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.”








A MAN BITTEN BY A DOG.


A Man, who had been sadly torn by a Dog, was advised by some Old Woman,
as a cure, to dip a piece of bread in the wound, and give it to the
Cur that bit him. He did so, and Æsop happening to pass by just at the
time, asked him what he meant by it? The man informed him. Why then,
says Æsop, do it as privately as you can, I beseech you; for if the
rest of the Dogs of the town were to see you, we should all be eaten up
alive by them.


APPLICATION.

Vice should always be considered as the proper object of punishment,
and we should on no account connive at offences of an atrocious nature,
much less confer rewards on the criminals: for nothing contributes so
much to the increase of roguery, as when the undertakings of a knave
are attended with success. If it were not for the fear of punishment, a
great part of mankind, who now make a shift to keep themselves honest,
would be great villains. But if criminals, instead of meeting with
punishment, were, by having been such, to attain honour and preferment,
our natural inclination to mischief would be increased, and we should
be wicked out of emulation. We should rather strive to make virtue as
tempting as possible, and throw out every allurement in our power to
draw the minds of the wavering and unsettled to espouse her cause.








THE FOX AND THE TIGER.


A skilful Archer coming into the woods, directed his arrows so
successfully, that he slew many wild beasts, and wounded several
others. This put the whole savage kind into a great consternation, and
made them fly into the most retired thickets for refuge. At last, the
Tiger resumed courage, and bidding them not be afraid, said that he
alone would engage the enemy, telling them they might depend on his
valour to avenge their wrongs. In the midst of these threats, while
he was lashing himself with his tail, and tearing up the ground with
anger, an arrow pierced his ribs, and hung by its barbed point in his
side. He set up a loud and hideous roar, occasioned by the anguish he
felt, and endeavoured to draw out the painful dart with his teeth: when
the Fox approaching him, enquired with an air of surprise, who it was
that could have strength and courage enough to wound so mighty and
valorous a beast? Ah! says the Tiger, I was mistaken in my reckoning:
it was that invincible Man yonder.


APPLICATION.

Though strength and courage are very good ingredients towards
making us secure and formidable in the world, yet unless there be a
proper portion of wisdom or policy to direct them, instead of being
serviceable, they often prove detrimental to their proprietors. A
rash forward man, who depends upon the excellence of his own parts
and accomplishments, is likewise apt to expose a weak side, which his
enemies might not otherwise have observed; and gives an advantage to
others by those very means which he fancied might have secured it to
himself. Counsel and conduct always did and always will govern the
world; and the strong, in spite of all their force, can never avoid
being tools to the crafty. Some men are as much superior to others in
wisdom and policy, as man in general is above the brute. Strength,
ill-governed, opposed to them, is like a quarter staff in the hands
of a huge, robust, but bungling fellow, who fights against a master
of the science. The latter, though without a weapon, would have skill
and address enough to disarm his adversary, and drub him with his own
staff. In a word, savage fierceness and brutal strength, must not
pretend to stand in competition with policy and stratagem.






THE DOG AND THE SHADOW.


A Dog, crossing a rivulet with a piece of flesh in his mouth, saw his
own shadow represented in the clear mirror of the stream; and believing
it to be another Dog, who was carrying another piece of flesh, he could
not forbear catching at it; but was so far from getting any thing by
his greedy design, that he dropt the piece he had in his mouth, which
immediately sunk to the bottom, and was irrecoverably lost.


APPLICATION.

    Base is the man who pines amidst his store,
    And fat with plenty, griping covets more.

Excessive greediness, in the end, mostly misses what it aims at, and
he that catches at more than belongs to him, justly deserves to lose
what he has. Yet nothing is more common, and, at the same time more
pernicious, than this selfish principle. It prevails from the king
to the peasant; and all orders and degrees of men are more or less
infected with it. Great monarchs have been drawn in by this greedy
humour to grasp at the dominions of their neighbours; not that they
wanted any thing more to feed their luxury, but to gratify their
insatiable appetite for vain glory; and many states have been reduced
to the last extremity by attempting such unjust encroachments. He that
thinks he sees the estate of another in a pack of cards, or a box and
dice, and ventures his own in the pursuit of it, should not repine, if
he finds himself a beggar in the end.








THE BEAR AND THE BEE-HIVES.


A Bear, climbing over the fence into a place where Bees were kept,
began to plunder the hives, and rob them of their honey; but the Bees,
to revenge the injury, attacked him in a whole swarm together; and
though they were not able to pierce his rugged hide, yet, with their
little stings they so annoyed his eyes and nostrils, that, unable to
endure the smarting pain, with impatience he tore the skin over his
ears, with his own claws, and suffered ample punishment for the injury
he had done the Bees, in breaking open their waxen cells.


APPLICATION.

Many and great are the injuries of which men are guilty towards each
other, for the sake of gratifying some base appetite: for there are
those who would not scruple to bring desolation upon their country, and
run the hazard of their own necks into the bargain, rather than balk
a wicked inclination, either of cruelty, ambition, or avarice. But it
were to be wished, that all who are hurried on by such blind impulses,
would consider a moment before they proceed to irrevocable execution.
Injuries and wrongs not only call for revenge and reparation with the
voice of equity itself, but oftentimes carry their punishment along
with them; and, by an unforeseen train of events, are retorted on the
head of the actor, who not seldom, from a deep remorse, expiates them
upon himself by his own hand.








THE DRUNKEN HUSBAND.


A certain Woman had a Drunken Husband, whom she had endeavoured to
reclaim by several ways, without effect. She, at last, tried this
stratagem: when he was brought home one night dead drunk, she ordered
him to be carried to a burial-place, and there laid in a vault, as if
he had been dead indeed. Thus she left him, and went away till she
thought he might be come to himself, and grown sober again. When she
returned, and knocked at the door of the vault, the man cried out,
who’s there? I am the person, says she, in a dismal tone of voice, that
waits upon the dead folks, and I am come to bring you some victuals.
Ah, good waiter, says he, let the victuals alone and bring me a little
drink, I beseech thee. The Woman hearing this, fell to tearing her
hair, and beating her breast in a woeful manner: Unhappy wretch that I
am, says she, this was the only way that I could think of to reform the
beastly sot; but instead of gaining my point, I am only convinced that
his drunkenness is an incurable habit, which he intends to carry with
him into the other world.


APPLICATION.

This Fable is intended to shew us the prevalence of custom; and how
by using ourselves to any evil practice, we may let it grow into
such a habit as we shall never be able to divest ourselves of. “O!
that men should put an enemy into their mouths to steal away their
brains!” There is no vice which gains an ascendant over us more
insensibly, or more incurably, than drunkenness: it takes root by
degrees, and comes at length to be past both remedy and shame. Habitual
drunkenness stupifies the senses, destroys the understanding, fills
its votaries with diseases, and makes them incapable of business. It
cuts short the thread of life, or brings on an early old age, besides
the mischief it does in the mean time to a man’s family and affairs,
and the scandal it brings upon himself: for a sot is one of the most
despicable and disgusting characters in life. After he has destroyed
his reasoning faculties, and thus shewn his ingratitude to the giver of
them, he flies to palliatives as a remedy for the diseases which his
intemperance has caused, and goes on in a course of taking whets and
cordials, and more drink, till he falls a martyr to the vice, to which
through life he has been a slave.






THE LIONESS AND THE FOX.


The Lioness and the Fox meeting together, fell into discourse, and
the conversation turning upon the breeding and fruitfulness of some
living creatures above others, the Fox could not forbear taking the
opportunity of observing to the Lioness, that for her part, she thought
Foxes were as happy in that respect as almost any other creatures; for
they bred constantly once a year, if not oftener, and always had a
good litter of cubs at every birth; and yet, says she, there are some
folks who are never delivered of more than one at a time, and that
perhaps not above once or twice in their whole lives, who hold up their
noses, and value themselves so much upon it, that they think all other
creatures beneath them, and scarce worthy to be spoken to. The Lioness,
who all the time perceived at whom this reflection pointed, replied,
what you have observed is true. You litter often, and produce a great
many at a time; but what are they? Foxes! I, indeed, may have but one
at a time; but you should remember that that one is a Lion.


APPLICATION.

Our productions, of whatsoever kind, are not to be esteemed so much by
their quantity as by their quality. It is not being employed much, but
well, and to the purpose, which will make us useful to the age we live
in, and celebrated by those which are to come. As the multiplication
of foxes and other vermin is a misfortune to the countries which are
infested with them, so one cannot help throwing out a melancholy
reflection, when one sees some particular classes of the human kind
increase so fast as they do. But the most obvious meaning of this
Fable is the hint it gives us in relation to authors. These gentlemen
should never attempt to raise themselves a reputation by trumping up
a long catalogue of their various productions, since there is more
glory in having written one tolerable piece than a thousand indifferent
ones; and whoever has had the good fortune to please in one literary
performance, should be very cautious how he stakes his reputation in a
second attempt.








THE LAMB BROUGHT UP BY A GOAT.


A Wolf, prowling about for his prey, espied a Lamb sucking a Goat. You
silly creature! says he, you quite mistake; this is not your mother;
she is yonder among a flock of sheep: do allow me to conduct you to
her. No, no, replies the Lamb, the mother that bore me may indeed be
yonder; but when she dropped me, she shewed no further care, but left
me unprovided for, to shift for myself, regardless of what might become
of me; and had it not been for the kindness of this honest Goat, who
took compassion upon my helplessness, I must have suffered all the
miseries to which inexperienced youth and innocence are exposed, when
left without a guide to the mercy of the world.


APPLICATION.

This Fable is levelled at those parents, too often met with in society,
who, through negligence or ignorance of their duty, suffer their
offspring to grow up to maturity, without instilling into their minds
a single good principle of morality, or a reverence for religion,
to guide them through life, and to guard them from falling into the
snares of every wolf who may seek their destruction. Others again,
more abandoned indeed, and callous to the tender ties of nature,
bring forth an offspring whom they neither cherish nor provide for.
Such a description of persons are not fit to become parents, and they
must not be surprized, if their want of parental affection produce a
corresponding want of filial attachment and respect: for the duties
between parents and children are reciprocal. It is the goodness of
parents which chiefly entitles them to the respect due to that name;
and it is a paramount duty of children to honour, obey, and revere such
parents as fulfil the obligations which the laws of God and nature
impose upon those who bring children into the world.








THE HEN AND THE SWALLOW.


A Hen, having found a nest of Serpent’s eggs in a dung-hill,
immediately, with a fostering care, sat upon them, with a design to
hatch them. A Swallow observing this, flew towards her, and with great
earnestness forewarned her of her danger. What! said she, are you mad,
to bring forth a brood of such pernicious creatures? Be assured, the
instant they are warmed into life, you are the first they will attack
and wreak their venomous spite upon: but the Hen persisted in her
folly, and the end verified the Swallow’s prediction.


APPLICATION.

It is too often the hard fortune of many a kind good-natured man in the
world to breed up a bird to pick out his own eyes, in despite of all
cautions to the contrary; but they who want foresight should hearken to
the council of the wise, as this might have the effect of preventing
their spending much time and good offices on the undeserving, perhaps
to the utter ruin of themselves. It is the duty of all men to act
fairly, openly, and honestly, in all their transactions in life; to
do justice to all; but to consider well the character of those on
whom they would confer favours: for gratitude is one of the rarest
as well as the greatest of virtues. The Fable is intended to shew
that we should never have any dealings with bad men, even to do them
kindnesses. Men of evil principles are a generation of vipers, that
ought to be crushed; and every rogue should be looked upon by honest
men as a venomous serpent. The man who is occasionally, or by accident,
one’s enemy, may be mollified by kindness, and reclaimed by good usage:
such a behaviour both reason and morality expect from us: but we should
ever resolve, if not to suppress, at least to have no connexion with
those whose blood is tinctured with hereditary, habitual villainy, and
their nature leavened with evil, to such a degree as to be incapable of
a reformation.








THE ENVIOUS MAN AND THE COVETOUS.


An Envious Man happened to be offering up his prayers to Jupiter, at
the same time and in the same place with a covetous miserable Fellow.
Jupiter sent Apollo to examine the merits of their petitions, and to
give them such relief as he should think proper. Apollo therefore
opened his commission, and told them, that to make short of the matter,
whatever the one asked, the other should have doubled. Upon this, the
Covetous Man, who had a thousand things to request, forebore to ask
first, hoping to receive a double quantity; for he concluded that
all men’s wishes sympathized with his own. By this circumstance, the
Envious Man had the opportunity of giving vent to his malignity, and of
preferring his petition first, which was what he aimed at; so without
hesitation he prayed to have one of his eyes put out, knowing that of
consequence his companion would be deprived of both.


APPLICATION.

This Fable is levelled at two of the most odious passions which degrade
the mind of man. In the extremes of their unsocial views, envy places
its happiness in the misery and the misfortunes of others, and pines
and sickens at their joy; and avarice, unblest amidst its stores,
is never satisfied unless it can get all to itself, although its
insatiable cravings are at once unaccountable, miserable, and absurd.








THE PORCUPINE AND THE SNAKES.


A Porcupine, wanting a shelter for himself, begged a nest of Snakes to
give him admittance into their snug cave. They were prevailed upon,
and let him in accordingly; but were so annoyed with his sharp prickly
quills, that they soon repented of their easy compliance, and intreated
the Porcupine to withdraw, and leave them their hole to themselves. No,
said he, let them quit the place that dont like it; for my part, I am
well enough satisfied as I am.


APPLICATION.

This Fable points out the danger of entering into any degree of
friendship, alliance, or partnership with any person whatever,
before we have thoroughly considered his nature and qualities, his
circumstances, and his humour; and also the necessity of examining
our own temper and disposition, to discover, if we can, how far these
may accord with the genius of those with whom we are about to form
a connection; otherwise our associations, of whatever kind they be,
may prove the greatest plague of our life. Young people, who are warm
in all their passions, and suffer them, like a veil, to hoodwink
their reason, often throw open their arms at once, and admit into the
greatest intimacy persons whom they know little of, but by false and
uncertain lights, and thus, perhaps, take a Porcupine into their bosom,
instead of an inmate who might sooth the cares of life, as an amiable
consort, or a valuable friend.








THE SOW AND THE WOLF.


A Sow that had just farrowed, and lay in her sty with her whole litter
of Pigs, was visited by a Wolf, who secretly longed to make a meal of
one of them, but knew not how to come at it. So, under the pretence
of a friendly visit, he gave her a call, and endeavoured to insinuate
himself into her good graces by his apparently kind enquiries after the
welfare of herself and her young family. Can I be of any service to
you, Mrs Sow? said he: if I can, it shall not on my part be wanting;
and if you have a mind to go abroad for a little fresh air, you may
depend upon my taking as much care of your young family as you could
do yourself. No, I thank you, Mr Wolf, I thoroughly understand your
meaning, and the greatest favour you can do to me and my Pigs, is to
keep your distance.


APPLICATION.

When an entire stranger, or any one of whom we have no reason to
entertain a good opinion, obtrudes upon us an offer of his services,
we ought to look to our own safety, and shew a shyness and coldness
towards him. But there are also many men with whom it is dangerous to
have the least connection, and with whom any commerce or correspondence
will certainly be to our detriment. From these we should, therefore,
resolve not to accept even favours, but carefully avoid being under
any obligation to them: for in the end, their apparent kindness will
shew itself to be a real injury; and there is no method of guarding so
effectually against such people, as that of entirely avoiding their
society, or shutting our doors against them, as we would do against a
thief.








THE FROGS AND THEIR KING.


In antient times, the nation of Frogs lived an easy free life among
their lakes and ponds; but at length grew dissatisfied with such a
continuance of undisturbed tranquillity, and petitioned Jupiter for
a king. Jupiter smiled at their folly, and threw them down a log of
wood, and with a thundering voice said, “there is a king for you.” With
this, and the sudden splash it made in the water, they were at first
quite panic-struck, and for some time durst not put their heads up; but
by degrees they ventured to take a peep, and at length even to leap
upon the log. Not being pleased with so tame and insipid a king, they
again petitioned Jupiter for another, who would exert more authority.
Jupiter, disgusted at their importunate folly, sent them a Stork for
their king, who, without ceremony, eat them up whenever his craving
appetite required a supply.


APPLICATION.

This Fable is said to have been spoken by Æsop to the Athenians, who
had flourished under their commonwealth, and lived under good and
wholesome laws of their own enacting, until, in process of time,
they suffered their liberty to run into licentiousness; and factious
designing men fomented divisions, and raised animosities among them.
When thus rendered weak, Pisistratus took the advantage, and seized
upon their citadel and liberties both together. The Athenians finding
themselves in a state of slavery, though their tyrant happened to be a
merciful one, could not bear the thoughts of it; but Æsop in reciting
the Fable to them, prescribes patience where there was no other remedy,
and adds, at last, “Wherefore, my dear countrymen, be contented with
your present condition, bad as it is, for fear a change should make it
worse.”








THE OLD WOMAN AND THE EMPTY CASK.


An Old Woman, seeing a Wine Cask, which had been emptied of its
contents, but the very lees of which still perfumed the air with a
grateful cordial scent, applied her nose to the bunghole, and snuffing
very heartily for some time, at last broke out into this exclamation: O
delicious smell! How good! how charming must you have been once, when
your very dregs are so agreeable and refreshing!


APPLICATION.

Phædrus was an old man when he wrote his Fables, and this he applies
to himself; intimating what we ought to judge of his youth, when his
old age was capable of such productions. It is at once a pleasing
and melancholy idea that is given us by the intercourse with elderly
persons, whose conversation is relishing and agreeable, and we cannot
help concluding that they must have been very engaging in the prime of
life, when in their decline they are still capable of yielding us so
much pleasure. Nor can we help feeling regret, that this fountain of
delight is now almost dried up, and going to forsake us for ever. On
the contrary, when people have neglected to cultivate their minds in
youth, their whole deportment through life is marked with the effects
of this great want, and their old age is burthensome to themselves, and
their conversation insipid to others; and like liquor of a thin body,
and vile quality, soon becomes sour, vapid, or good for nothing.








JUPITER AND THE CAMEL.


The Camel presented a petition to Jupiter, complaining of the hardships
of his case, in not having, like bulls and other creatures, horns,
or any weapon of defence to protect himself from the attacks of his
enemies; and praying that relief might be granted him in such manner as
should be thought most expedient. Jupiter could not help smiling at his
impertinent address; but, however, rejected the petition, and told him,
that so far from granting his unreasonable request, he would take care
that henceforward his ears should be shortened, as a punishment for his
presumptuous importunity.


APPLICATION.

The nature of things is so fixed in every particular, that they are
very weak, superstitious people, who think that it can be altered.
But besides the impossibility of producing a change by foolish
importunities, they who employ much of their time in that way, instead
of getting, are sure to lose in the end. When any man is so silly and
vexatious as to make unreasonable complaints, and to harbour undue
repinings in his heart, his peevishness will lessen the real good which
he possesses, and the sourness of his temper shorten that allowance
of comfort which he already thinks too scanty. Thus, in truth, it is
not Providence, but ourselves, who punish our own importunity, in
soliciting for impossibilities, with a sharp corroding care, which
abridges us of some part of that little pleasure which Heaven has cast
into our lot.

    Happy the man without a wish for more,
    Who quietly enjoys his little store,
    And knows to heaven, with gratitude to pay
    Thanks for what’s given, and what is ta’en away.








THE STAG AND THE FAWN.


A Stag, grown old and mischievous, was, according to custom, stamping
with his foot, making threatening motions with his head, and bellowing
so terribly, that the whole herd quaked for fear of him; when one of
the little Fawns coming up, addressed him to this purpose: Pray what
is the reason that you, who are so stout and formidable at all other
times, if you do but hear the cry of the hounds, are ready to fly out
of your skin for fear? What you observe is true, replied the Stag,
though I know not how to account for it: I am indeed vigorous and
able enough, I think, to defend myself against all attacks, and often
resolve with myself, that nothing shall ever dismay my courage for the
future; but, alas! I no sooner hear the voice of the hounds, but all my
spirits fail, and I cannot help making off as fast as my legs can carry
me.


APPLICATION.

    Try what we can, do what we will,
    Yet nature will be nature still.

The predominance of nature will generally shew itself through all
the disguises which artful men endeavour to throw over it. Cowardice
particularly gives us but the more suspicion of its existence, when it
would conceal itself under an affected fierceness, as they who would
smother an ill smell by a cloud of perfume, are imagined to be but the
more offensive. When we have done all, nature will remain what she was,
and shew herself whenever she is called upon: therefore, whatever we do
in contradiction to her laws, is so forced and affected, that it must
needs expose and make us truly ridiculous.








THE FIR AND THE BRAMBLE.


A tall Fir, that stood towering up in the forest, was so proud of his
dignity and high station, that he looked with disdain upon the little
shrubs that grew beneath him. A lowly Bramble had often been made to
feel the insults and gloomy frowns of his lofty neighbour, who, on the
slightest rufflings of the winds, shook his extended arms over the
humble shrub, and upbraided him with his contemptible situation. As for
me, said the Fir, I am the first in the forest for beauty and rank:
my top shoots up into the clouds, and my branches display a perpetual
verdure, whilst you lie grovelling upon the ground, and could not live
were I to leave off sprinkling you with the drops from my extremities.
At this the Bramble set up his prickles, and replied, that this
haughtiness arose from pride and ignorance; for He that made thee a
lofty tree, could, with equal ease, have made thee an humble Bramble;
and high as thou art, a puff of His breath, in the message of a north
wind, can rob thee of thy verdure, or lay thee low; and further, I
pray thee tell me, when the woodman comes with his axe to fell timber,
whether thou wouldst not rather be a Bramble than a Fir?


APPLICATION.

Pride, which was implanted in the human breast for wise purposes,
should carefully be directed aright. It was intended only to exalt the
minds of all ranks and conditions of men, to that pitch, which will
make them spurn at, and despise the doing of a mean or dishonourable
action; and it is only misapplied, when it puffs up those whom fortune
has placed in high stations, or overloaded with riches, and tempts
them to look down with derision on those below them. The higher a man
is exalted in life, but especially if he have risen by dishonourable
means, the more unlikely it is that he will escape a storm, or the
mischiefs to which he may be exposed in his public capacity, in any
convulsion that may befal his country. When public justice overtakes
him, and he finds the day of reckoning near at hand, the honest monitor
within will put him in mind of his true situation, and he will then be
enabled to make a just comparison between his own lofty station, and
that of the poor, but honest, man.








THE BEES, THE DRONES, AND THE WASP.


A number of Drones, who had long lived at their ease in a hive of Bees,
without contributing by their labour to make any honey, at length began
to dispute the right of the Bees, and insisted that both the honey and
the combs were their property. The Bees, after much altercation, at
last offered to leave the dispute to reference, and this being assented
to by the Drones, the Wasp was chosen umpire. Accordingly, he began by
declaring, that as both parties, he hoped, were his friends, and he
wished them well, he would instantly proceed upon the investigation. I
must own, says he, that the point is somewhat dubious, for I have often
seen you both in the same hive, and excepting that the Drones are of a
more portly size and appearance, you are all otherwise nearly alike in
person: but as I have not been able to see who worked, and who did not,
I know of no mode in which I shall be enabled to judge so correctly, as
by setting each party to work at the making of the honey. Therefore,
addressing himself to the Bees, you take one hive; and you, speaking to
the Drones, will be so good as to take another, and both go to work to
make honey as fast as you can. The Bees readily accepted the proposal;
but the Drones hung back, and would not agree to it. So, so! says
Judge Wasp, I see clearly how the matter stands; and without further
ceremony, declared in favour of the Bees.


APPLICATION.

The surest method of detecting ignorance and inability, is to put
arrogant pretenders to the test, and appreciate their claims by a fair
trial; and when those who assume the merit due to works of ingenuity,
refuse to prove their title by a display of their talents, we may well
conclude that their pretensions are unfounded, and that they are mere
impostors. When men, who are at the head of national affairs, will not
be at the pains to find out merit (for men of that character are too
modest to obtrude themselves) they will be surrounded by a swarm of
idle, impudent, good-for-nothing drones; and these too often succeed in
obtaining those benefits which should be the reward of men of parts,
integrity, and industry.






THE FROG AND THE FOX.


A Frog leaping out of the lake, and taking the advantage of a rising
ground, made a proclamation to all the beasts of the forest, that he
was an able physician, and for curing all manner of distempers, would
turn his back to no person living. This discourse, with the aid of some
hard cramp words, which nobody understood, made the beasts admire his
learning, and give credit to every thing he said. At last, the Fox,
who was present, with indignation asked him, how he could have the
impudence, with those thin lanthorn jaws, that meagre pale phiz, and
blotched spotted body, to pretend to cure the infirmities of others?


APPLICATION.

A sickly and infirm look is as disadvantageous in a physician, as a
rakish one in a clergyman, or a sheepish one in a soldier. We should
not set up for correctors of the faults of others, whilst we labour
under the same ourselves. Good advice ought always to be followed,
without our being prejudiced upon account of the person from whom it
comes; but it is seldom that men can be brought to think us worth
minding, when we prescribe cures for maladies with which we ourselves
are afflicted. Physician heal thyself, is too scriptural, not to be
applied upon such an occasion; and if we would avoid being the jest of
an audience, we must be sound and free from those diseases of which we
would endeavour to cure others. How shocked must people have been to
hear a preacher for a whole hour declaim against drunkenness, when his
own weaknesses have been such, that he could neither bear nor forbear
drinking, and perhaps was the only person in the congregation who
made the doctrine at that time necessary! Others, too, have been very
zealous in censuring crimes, of which none were suspected more than
themselves: but let such silly hypocrites remember, that they whose
eyes want couching, are the most improper people in the world to set up
for oculists.








THE CAT AND THE MICE.


A certain house being much infested with Mice, a Cat was at length
procured, who very diligently hunted after them, and killed great
numbers every night. The Mice, being exceedingly alarmed at this
destruction among their family, consulted together upon what was
best to be done for their preservation against so terrible and cruel
an enemy. After some debate, they came to the resolution, that no
one should, in future, descend below the uppermost shelf. The Cat,
observing their extreme caution, endeavoured to draw them down to their
old haunts by stratagem, for which purpose, she suspended herself by
her hinder legs upon a peg in the pantry, and hoped by this trick
to lull their suspicions, and to entice them to venture within her
reach. She had not long been in this posture, before a cunning old
Mouse peeped over the edge of the shelf, and squeaked out thus: Aha!
Mrs Puss, are you there then? There may you be; but I would not trust
myself with you, though your skin were stuffed with straw.


APPLICATION.

We cannot be too much upon our guard against fraud and imposition of
every kind; and prudence in many cases would rather counsel us to
forego some advantages, than endeavour to gain them at a risk of which
we cannot certainly ascertain the amount. We should more particularly
suspect some design in the professions of those who have once injured
us; and though they may promise fairly for the future, it is no breach
of charity to doubt their sincerity, and decline their proposals,
however plausible they may appear; for experience shews that many of
the misfortunes which we experience through life, are caused by our own
too great credulity.








THE OAK AND THE REED.


An Oak, which hung over the bank of a river, was blown down by a
violent storm of wind, and as it was carried along by the stream, some
of its boughs brushed against a Reed which grew near the shore. This
struck the Oak with a thought of admiration, and he could not forbear
asking the Reed how he came to stand so secure and unhurt, in a tempest
which had been furious enough to tear up an Oak by the roots? Why, says
the Reed, I secure myself by a conduct the reverse of yours: instead
of being stubborn and stiff, and confiding in my strength, I yield
and bend to the blast, and let it go over me, knowing how vain and
fruitless it would be to resist.


APPLICATION.

Though a tame submission to injuries which it is in our power to
redress, be generally esteemed a base and dishonourable thing, yet
to resist where there is no probability, or even hope of getting the
better, may also be looked upon as the effect of a blind temerity, and
perhaps of a weak understanding. The strokes of fortune are oftentimes
as irresistible as they are severe, and he who with an impatient spirit
fights against her, instead of alleviating, does but double the blows
upon himself. A person of a quiet still temper, whether it be given him
by nature, or acquired by art, calmly composes himself in the midst
of a storm, so as to elude the shock, or receive it with the least
detriment,--like a prudent experienced sailor, who, in swimming to the
shore from a wrecked vessel, in a swelling sea, does not oppose the
fury of the waves, but stoops and gives way, that they may roll over
his head without obstruction. The doctrine of absolute submission in
all cases, is an absurd dogmatical precept, with nothing but ignorance
and superstition to support it; but, upon particular occasions, and
where it is impossible for us to overcome, to submit patiently is one
of the most reasonable maxims of life.

[Illustration:

  _O God of infinite Wisdom
  Truth Justice & Mercy
  I thank Thee_
]






FORTUNE AND THE BOY.


A School Boy, fatigued with play, laid himself down by the brink of a
deep well, where he fell fast asleep. Fortune, whose wheel is always
in motion, passing by, kindly gave him a tap on the head, and awoke
him. My good boy, said she, arise and depart from this dangerous
situation immediately; for if you had tumbled into this well, and been
drowned, your friends would not have attributed the accident to your
carelessness, but would have laid the whole blame upon me.


APPLICATION.

Mankind suffer more evils from their own imprudence, than from events
which it is not in their power to controul; but they are ever ready
to complain of the perverseness of chance, and the capriciousness of
fortune, and to impute the blame to her for whatever mischiefs may
befal them, when these clearly arise from their own misconduct. Few
men pass through life without having had reason at one time or another
to thank Fortune for her favours; and great is the number of those who
have, through their own folly, indolence, or inattention, neglected
to profit by her kindness. Prudent people take every care not to put
themselves in the power of accidents; but those who carelessly give
up all their concerns to the guidance of blind chance, must not be
surprised if by some of the revolutions of Fortune’s wheel, they feel
the punishment due to their negligence and folly.

[Illustration: BLOODO ET GUTTO

  _The Butchers Coat
  of Arms_
]






THE WOLF AND THE CRANE.


A Wolf, after devouring his prey, happened to have a bone stick in his
throat, which gave him so much pain, that he went howling up and down,
and importuning every creature he met to lend him a kind hand in order
to his relief; nay, he promised a reasonable reward to any one who
should perform the operation with success. At last, the Crane undertook
the business, ventured his long neck into the rapacious felon’s throat,
plucked out the bone, and asked for the promised reward. The Wolf,
turning his eyes disdainfully towards him, said, I did not think you
had been so unconscionable: I had your head in my mouth, and could have
bit it off whenever I pleased, but suffered you to take it away without
any damage, and yet you are not contented!

    Who serves a villain, might as wisely free
    The hardened murderer from the fatal tree.


APPLICATION.

There are people in the world to whom it may be wrong to do services,
upon a double score: first, because they never deserve to have a good
office done them; and secondly, because when once engaged, it is so
hard a matter to get well rid of their acquaintance. We ought to
consider what kind of people they are, to whom we are desired to do
good offices, before we do them: for he that grants a favour, or even
confides in a person of no honour, instead of finding his account in
it, comes off well, if he be no sufferer in the end.








THE HART AND THE VINE.


A Hart being closely pursued by the Hunters, concealed himself under
the broad leaves of a shady Vine. When the Hunters were gone by, and
had given him over for lost, he thinking himself very secure, began to
crop and eat the leaves of his shelter. By this, the branches being
put into a rustling motion drew the attention of some of the Hunters
that way, who seeing the Vine stir, and fancying some wild beast had
taken covert there, shot their arrows at a venture, and killed the
Deer. Before he expired, he uttered his dying words to this purpose:
“Ah!” says he, “I suffer justly for my ingratitude; because I could not
forbear doing an injury to the Vine, which so kindly concealed me in
time of danger.”


APPLICATION.

There is no maxim which deserves more frequent repetition, and if the
heart be capable of amendment by precept and admonition, no virtue
should be more strongly enforced and recommended than gratitude.
Where sentiments of this kind are wanting, our natures soon become
debased, and our minds depraved. Ingratitude has ever been justly
branded as the blackest of crimes, and, as it were, comprehending
all other vices within it. Nor can we say that this opinion is too
severe: for if a man be capable of injuring his benefactor, what will
he scruple doing towards another? We may fairly conclude that he
who is guilty of ingratitude, will not hesitate at any other crime
of an inferior nature. Since there are no human laws to punish this
infamous prevailing vice, it would only be doing an act of justice, and
supplying the want, to point out criminals of this description to the
reprobation of mankind, that men of worth might avoid all intercourse
and communication with them. The ingrate should also bear in mind, that
he strips himself of the protection which might have been afforded by
his friends, and exposes himself to the shafts of his enemies, who will
not fail to take advantage of the defenceless state to which his folly
and depravity have reduced him.








THE HUNTED BEAVER.


A Beaver, having strayed far from his dwelling, (which it is well known
these animals construct with infinite sagacity) was closely pursued by
the hunters, and knowing that he was thus persecuted for the sake of
the castor, which is contained in two little bags placed underneath and
near the tail, he, with great resolution and presence of mind, bit them
off with his teeth, and leaving them behind him, thus escaped with his
life.


APPLICATION.

It is in vain for individuals to contend against an overwhelming power,
and an ineffectual resistance to violence only tends to double our
sufferings. When life is pursued, and in danger, whoever values it
should give up every thing but his honour to preserve it; and there
can be no disgrace in yielding voluntarily to our persecutors, when we
are certain that resistance is in vain: but this doctrine can seldom be
applied to the case of a whole nation, for when tyranny and rapine are
making their wicked strides over a country (as has sometimes happened
even in Europe) the people would seldom fail to rid themselves of their
oppressors, if they resolved to rise as one man, and bravely oppose
them.








THE ASS AND THE LION HUNTING.


The Lion, having thinned the forest of great numbers of the beasts upon
which he preyed, and so scared and intimidated the rest, that he found
it very difficult to get hold of any more of them, bethought himself of
a new expedient to obtain more readily a fresh supply. He invited the
Ass to assist him in his plan, and gave him instructions how to act.
Go, said the Lion, and hide thyself in yonder thicket, and then let me
hear thee bray in the most frightful manner thou possibly canst. The
stratagem took effect accordingly. The Ass brayed most hideously, and
the timorous beasts, not knowing what to think of it, began to scour
off as fast as they could; when the Lion, who was posted at a proper
avenue, seized and killed them as he pleased. Having got his belly
full, he called out to the Ass, and bade him leave off, telling him
he had done enough. Upon this, the long-eared brute came out of his
ambush, and approaching the Lion, asked him, with an air of conceit,
how he liked his performance? Prodigiously! says he, you did it so
well, that I protest had I not known your nature and temper, I might
have been frightened myself.


APPLICATION.

A bragging cowardly fellow may impose upon people that do not know him;
but is the greatest jest imaginable to those who do. There are many
men who appear very terrible and big in their manner of expressing
themselves, and if you could be persuaded to take their own word for
it, are perfect Lions; but if we take the pains to enquire a little
into their true nature, are as arrant Asses as ever brayed.








THE SOW AND THE BITCH.


A Sow and a Bitch happening to meet, a debate arose between them
concerning their fruitfulness. The Bitch insisted upon it, that she
brought forth more at a litter, and oftener, than any other four-legged
creature. Nay, said the Sow, you do not do so, for others are as
prolific as you; and besides, you are always in such a hurry, that you
bring your puppies into the world blind.


APPLICATION.

It is no wonder that our productions should come into the world blind
or lame, or otherwise defective, when by forced or unnatural methods
we accelerate their birth, and impatiently refuse to let them go their
full time. Then it is that the excellent proverb of the more haste the
worse speed, is felt and fully verified. This Fable has been pointed
at those authors whose itch for scribbling has been an annoyance to
the world, rather than of any real use to it; and who have been proud
of, and boasted of the numerous but flimsy productions of their vain
and shallow brains. It is proper to put such people in mind, that it
is not he who does most, but he who does the best, that will meet the
approbation of mankind.








THE SATYR AND THE TRAVELLER.


A Satyr, as he was ranging the forest in an exceeding cold snowy
season, met with a Traveller half-starved with the extremity of the
weather. He took compassion on him, and kindly invited him home to a
warm cave he had in the hollow of a rock. As soon as they had entered
and sat down, notwithstanding there was a good fire in the place, the
chilly Traveller could not forbear blowing his fingers. Upon the Satyr
asking him why he did so? He answered, that he did it to warm his
hands. The honest Sylvan having seen little of the world, admired a
man who was master of so valuable a quality as that of blowing heat;
and therefore resolved to entertain him in the best manner he could.
He spread the table with dried fruits of several sorts, and produced a
remnant of old cordial wine, which he mulled with some warm spices over
the fire, and presented to his shivering guest. But this the Traveller
thought fit to blow upon likewise; and when the Satyr demanded a
reason why he did so, he replied, to cool his dish. This second answer
provoked the Satyr’s indignation as much as the first had kindled his
surprise; so, taking the man by the shoulders, he thrust him out of the
place, saying, he would have nothing to do with a wretch who had so
vile a quality as to blow hot and cold with the same breath.


APPLICATION.

Nothing can be more offensive to a man of a sincere honest heart, than
he who blows with different breaths from the same mouth: who flatters a
man to his face, and reviles him behind his back. Such double-dealing
false friends ought and will always be considered as unworthy of being
treated otherwise than as worthless and disagreeable persons: for
unless the tenor of a man’s life be always true and consistent with
itself, the less one has to do with him the better. It is unfortunately
too common with persons of this cast of character, in the exalted
stations of life, to serve a present view, or perhaps only the caprice
or whim of the moment, to blow nothing but what is warm, benevolent,
and cherishing, to raise up the expectations of a dependent to the
highest degree; and when they suspect he may prove troublesome, they
then, by a sudden cold forbidding air, easily blast all his hopes and
expectations: but such a temper, whether it proceed from a designed or
natural levity, is detestable, and has been the cause of much trouble
and mortification to many a brave deserving man.






THE FOX AND THE GRAPES.


A hungry Fox coming into a vineyard where there hung delicious
clusters of ripe Grapes, his mouth watered to be at them; but they
were nailed up to a trellis so high, that with all his springing and
leaping he could not reach a single bunch. At last, growing tired and
disappointed, Let who will take them! says he, they are but green and
sour; so I’ll e’en let them alone.


APPLICATION.

To affect to despise that which they have long ineffectually laboured
to obtain, is the only consolation to which weak minds can have
recourse, both to palliate their inability, and to take off the
bitterness of disappointment. There is a strange propensity in mankind
to this temper, and there is a numerous class of vain coxcombs in the
world, who, because they would never be thought to be disappointed in
any of their pursuits, pretend a dislike to every thing they cannot
obtain. The discarded statesman, considering the corruption of the
times, would not have any hand in the administration of affairs for
the world! The needy adventurer, and pretended patriot, would fain
persuade all who will listen to them, that they would not go cringing
and creeping into a drawing-room, for the best place the king has in
his disposal! Worthless young fellows, who find that their addresses to
virtue and beauty are rejected; and poor rogues who laugh to scorn the
rich and great, are all alike in saying, like sly Reynard, the Grapes
are sour!








THE MISCHIEVOUS DOG.


A certain Man had a Dog which was so ferocious and surly, that he
was compelled to fasten a heavy clog to his collar, to keep him from
running at and indiscriminately seizing upon every animal that came in
his way. This the vain Cur took for a badge of honourable distinction,
and grew so insolent upon it, that he looked down with an air of scorn
upon the neighbouring Dogs, and refused to keep them company: but a sly
old poacher, who was one of the gang, assured him that he had no reason
to value himself upon the favour he wore, since it was fixed upon him
as a badge of disgrace, not of honour.


APPLICATION.

The only true way of estimating the value of tokens of distinction,
is to reflect on what account they were conferred. Those which have
been acquired for virtuous actions, will be regarded as illustrious
signs of dignity; but if they have been bestowed upon the worthless and
base, as the reward of vice or corruption, all the stars and garters,
and collars of an illustrious order,--all the tinsel glories in which
such creatures may strut about in fancied superiority, will not mask
them from the sight of men of discernment, who will always consider the
means by which their honours have been obtained, and truly estimate
them as badges of abasement and disgrace.








THE BULL AND THE GOAT.


A Bull being pursued by a Lion, fled towards a cave, in which he
designed to secure himself; but was opposed at the entrance by a Goat,
who had got possession before him, and, threatening a kind of defiance
with his horns, seemed resolved to dispute the pass. The Bull, who
thought he had no time to lose in a contest of this nature, immediately
made off; but told the Goat, that it was not for fear of him or his
defiances: for, says he, if the Lion were not so near, I would soon
teach you the difference between a Bull and a Goat.


APPLICATION.

    O’er-match’d, unaided, and his foes at hand,
    Safely the coward may the brave withstand;
    But think not, dastard, thus thy glories shine--
    He fears a greater force, but scoffs at thine.

It is very inhuman to deny succour and comfort to people in
tribulation; but to insult them, and add to their misfortunes, is
something superlatively brutish and cruel. There is, however, in
the world, a sort of people of this vile temper, and littleness of
mind, who wait for an opportunity of aggravating their neighbour’s
affliction, and defer the execution of their evil inclinations until
they can do it with the severest effect. If a person suffer under an
expensive law-suit, lest he should escape from that, one of these
gentlemen will take care to arrest him in a second action, hoping, at
least, to keep him at bay, while the more powerful adversary attacks
him on the other side. One cannot consider this temper, without
observing something remarkably cowardly in it: for these shuffling
antagonists never begin their encounter till they are very sure the
person they aim at is already over-matched.








THE FISHERMAN.


A certain Fisherman having laid his nets in the river, and placed
them across the whole stream from one side to the other, took a long
pole, and fell to beating the water to make the fish strike into his
nets. One of his neighbours seeing him do so, wondered what he meant,
and going up to him, Friend, says he, what are you doing here? Do you
think it is to be suffered that you shall stand splashing and dashing
the water, and making it so muddy, that it is not fit for use? Who do
you think can live at this rate? He was going on in a great fury, when
the other interrupted him, and replied, I do not much trouble myself
how you are to live with my doing this; but I assure you I cannot live
without it.


APPLICATION.

This Fable is levelled at those who love to “fish in troubled waters,”
and whose execrable principles are such, that they care not what
mischief or what confusion they occasion in the world, provided they
can obtain their ends, or even gratify some little selfish appetite.
Little villains would set fire to a town, provided they could rake
something of value to themselves out of its ashes; or kindle the flames
of discord among friends and neighbours, purely to gratify their own
malicious temper; and among the great ones there are those who, to
succeed in their ambitious designs, will make no scruple of involving
their country in divisions and animosities at home, and sometimes in
war and bloodshed abroad: provided they do but maintain themselves in
power, they care not what havoc and desolation they bring upon the rest
of mankind. Their only reason is, that it must be so, because they
cannot live as they wish without it. But brutish unsocial sentiments
like these, are such as a mere state of nature would scarcely suggest;
and it is perverting the very end, and overturning the first principles
of society, when, instead of contributing to the welfare of mankind,
in return for the benefits we receive from them, we thrive by their
misfortunes, or subsist by their ruin. Those, therefore, who have
the happiness of mankind at heart, (for happiness and morality are
inseparably connected) should enter their protest against such wicked
selfish notions, and oppose them with all their might; at the same time
shunning the society of their possessors as a plague, and consigning
their characters to the detestation of posterity.






THE FOX AND THE BOAR.


The Fox, in traversing the forest, observed a Boar rubbing his tusks
against a tree. Why how now, said the Fox, why make those martial
preparations of whetting the teeth, since there is no enemy near that I
can perceive? That may be, said the Boar; but you ought to know, Master
Reynard, that we should scour up our arms while we have leisure: for
in time of danger we shall have something else to do; and it is a good
thing always to be prepared against the worst that can happen.


APPLICATION.

All business that is necessary to be done should be done betimes: for
there is as little trouble in doing it in season as out of season; and
he that is always ready can never be taken by surprize. Wise, just,
and vigilant governments know that they cannot be safe in peace, unless
they are always prepared for war, and are ready to meet the worst that
can happen. When they become corrupt, or supine, and off their guard,
they thereby invite and expose their country to the sudden attacks of
its enemies. In private life, many evils and calamities befal those
who make no provision against unforeseen or untoward accidents, which
the prudent man prevents by looking forward to probable contingencies,
and having a reserve of every thing necessary before-hand,--that he
may not be put into hurry and confusion, nor thrown into dilemmas and
difficulties, when the time comes that he may have to encounter them.
It cannot be too strongly impressed upon the minds of all men, that
day by day they are approaching towards old age, and that they should
honourably endeavour to provide a store of conveniences against that
time, when they will be most in want of them, and least able to procure
them. To reflect properly upon this, will give them pleasure instead
of pain; and they will not die a day sooner for being always ready for
that certain event: to do otherwise is acting like weak-minded men, who
delay making their wills, and properly settling their worldly affairs,
because to them it looks so like the near approach of death.








CÆSAR AND THE SLAVE.


As Tiberius Cæsar was upon a journey to Naples, he stopped at a house
which he had upon the mountain Misenus. As he was walking in the
gardens attached to the house, one of his domestic slaves appeared
in the walks, sprinkling the ground with a watering pot, in order to
lay the dust, and this he did so officiously, and ran with so much
alertness from one walk to another, that wherever the Emperor went,
he still found this fellow mighty busy with his watering pot. But at
last his design being discovered, which was to attract the notice of
Cæsar by his extraordinary diligence, in the hope that he would make
him free,--part of the ceremony of doing which consisted in giving the
Slave a gentle stroke on one side of his face,--his imperial Majesty
being disposed to be merry, called the Man to him, and when he came
up, full of the joyful expectation of his liberty, Hark you friend,
says he, I have observed that you have been very busy a great while;
but you were officiously meddling where you had nothing to do, while
you might have employed your time better elsewhere; and therefore I
must tell you, that I cannot afford a box on the ear at so low a price
as you bid for it.


APPLICATION.

Phædrus tells us upon his word, that this is a true story, and that
he wrote it for the sake of a set of industrious idle gentlemen at
Rome, who were harassed and fatigued with a daily succession of care
and trouble, because they had nothing to do. Always in a hurry, but
without business; busy, but to no purpose; labouring under a voluntary
necessity, and taking abundance of pains to shew they were good for
nothing. But what great town or city is so entirely free of this sect,
as to render the moral of this Fable useless any where? For it points
at all those officious good-natured people, who are eternally running
up and down to serve their friends, without doing them any good; who,
by a complaisance wrong judged or ill applied, displease whilst they
endeavour to oblige, and are never doing less to the purpose than when
they are most employed. In a word, this Fable is designed for the
reformation of all those who endeavour to gain for themselves benefits
and applause, from a misapplied industry. It is not our being busy and
officious that will procure us the esteem of men of sense; but the
application of our actions to some noble useful purpose, and for the
general good of mankind.






THE FROGS AND THE FIGHTING BULLS.


A Frog, one day, peeping out of the lake, and looking about him, saw
two Bulls fighting at some distance off in the meadow, and calling
to his associates, Look, says he, what dreadful work is yonder! Dear
sirs, what will become of us? Tush, said one of his companions, do not
frighten yourself so about nothing; how can their quarrels affect us?
They are of a different kind, and are at present only contending which
shall be master of the herd. That is true, replies the first, their
quality and station in life are different from ours; but as one of them
will certainly prove conqueror, he that is worsted, being beaten out of
the meadow, will take refuge here in the marshes, and possibly tread
some of us to death; so you see we are more nearly concerned in this
dispute of theirs, than you were at first aware.


APPLICATION.

A wise man, however low his condition in life, looks forward through
the proper and natural course and connection of causes and effects;
and in so doing, he fortifies his mind against the worst that can
befal him. It is of no small importance to the honest and quiet part
of mankind, who desire nothing so much as to see peace and virtue
flourish, to consider well the consequences that may arise to them out
of the quarrels and feuds of the great, and to endeavour, by every
means in their power, to avoid being in any way drawn in by their
influence to become a party concerned in their broils and disputes: for
no matter in which way the strife between the high contending parties
may terminate, those who may have had the misfortune to be concerned
with them, ought to think themselves well off if they do not smart for
it severely in the end. How often has it happened, that men in eminent
stations, who want to engross all power into their own hands, begin,
under the mask of patriotism, to foment divisions and form factions,
and excite animosities between well-meaning, but undiscerning people,
without whose aid in one way or another they could not succeed; but
who, at the same time, little think that the great aim of their leaders
is nothing more than the advancement of their own private interest, or
ambitious ends. The good of the public is always pretended upon such
occasions, and may sometimes happen to be tacked to their own; but then
it is purely accidental, and never was originally intended.






THE OLD HOUND.


An Old Hound, who had excelled in his time, and given his Master great
satisfaction in many a chace, at last, through age, became feeble and
unserviceable. However, being in the field one day, when the Stag was
almost run down, he happened to be the first that came in with him,
and seized him by the haunch; but his decayed and broken teeth not
being able to keep their hold, the Deer escaped; upon which, his Master
fell into a great passion, and began to whip him severely. The honest
old creature is said to have barked out this apology: Ah! do not thus
strike your poor old servant: it is not my heart and inclination, but
my strength and speed, that fail me. If what I now am displease you,
pray do not forget what I have been!


APPLICATION.

    O let not those, whom honest servants bless,
    With cruel hands their age infirm oppress;
    Forget their service past, their former truth,
    And all the cares and labours of their youth.

This Fable is intended to reprove the ingratitude too common among
mankind, which leaves the faithful servant to want and wretchedness,
after he has spent the prime of his life in our service for a bare
subsistence. Where slavery is allowed, the laws compel the master to
provide for the worn-out slave; and where there is no law to enforce
the debt of gratitude, none but those who are insensible to all the
finer feelings of humanity will neglect it. Those who forget past
services, and treat their faithful servants or friends unkindly or
injuriously, when they are no longer of use to them, however high
their pride, are unworthy of the name of gentleman. They are, indeed,
commonly of an upstart breed, with whom the failure of human nature
itself is imputed as a crime; and servants and dependents, instead of
being considered their fellow-men, are treated like brutes for not
being more than men. The imprudence of this conduct is equal to its
wickedness, inasmuch as it directly tends to extinguish the honest
desire to please and to act faithfully, in the younger servants,
when they see that worn-out merit thus goes unrewarded. Humanity and
gratitude are the greatest ornaments of the human mind, and when they
are extinguished, every generous and noble sentiment perishes along
with them.






THE TWO BITCHES.


A Bitch, who was just ready to whelp, intreated another to lend her
her kennel only till her month was up, and assured her that then she
should have it again. The other very readily consented, and with a
great deal of civility, resigned it to her immediately. However, when
the time was elapsed, she came and made her a visit, and very modestly
intimated, that now she was up and well, she hoped she should see her
abroad again; for that, really, it would be inconvenient for her to be
without her kennel any longer, and therefore, she told her, she must
be so free as to desire her to provide herself with other lodgings
as soon as she could. The lying-in Bitch replied, that truly she was
ashamed of having kept her so long out of her own house; but it was not
upon her own account (for indeed she was well enough to go any where)
so much as that of her puppies, who were yet so weak, that she was
afraid they would not be able to follow her; and, if she would be so
good as to let her stay a fortnight longer, she would take it as the
greatest obligation in the world. The other Bitch was so good-natured
and compassionate as to comply with this request also; but at the
expiration of the term, came and told her positively that she must
turn out, for she could not possibly let her be there a day longer.
Must turn out, says the other; we will see to that: for I promise you,
unless you can beat me and my whole litter of whelps, you are never
likely to have any thing more to do here.


APPLICATION.

Wise and good-natured men do not shut their ears, nor harden their
hearts, against the calls of humanity, and the cries of distress; but
how often are their generous natures imposed upon by the artifices of
the base and worthless! These fail not to lay their plans with deep
cunning, to work themselves into the good graces of the benevolent, and
having accomplished their ends, the return they often make is abusive
language, or the most open acts of violence. One of the evil and
lamentable consequences arising out of this, is, that worth in distress
suffers by it: for distrust and suspicion take hold of the minds of
good men, and the hand of charity is thus benumbed. This Fable may
also serve to caution us never to let any thing we value go out of our
possession without good security. The man who means to act prudently,
ought never to put himself in the power of others, or to run any risk
of involving his own family in ruin.






THE HEN AND THE FOX.


A Fox having crept into an out-house, looked up and down, seeking what
he might devour, and at last spied a Hen perched up so high, that he
could by no means come at her. My dear friend, says he, how do you
do? I heard that you were ill, and kept within; at which I was so
concerned, that I could not rest till I came to see you. Pray how is it
with you now? Let me feel your pulse a little: indeed you do not look
well at all. He was running on after this fulsome manner, when the Hen
answered him from the roost, Truly, friend Reynard, you are judging
rightly, for I never was in more pain in my life: I must beg your
pardon for being so free as to tell you that I see no company; and you
must excuse me too for not coming down to you, for, to say the truth,
my condition is such, that I fear I should catch my death by it.


APPLICATION.

It is generally the design of hypocritical persons to delude and
impose upon others, with an eye to derive some benefit to themselves,
when they pretend to feel a flattering anxiety for their welfare; or
sometimes they may perhaps, with impertinent folly, mean no more than
merely to mock and befool men who are weak enough to become their
dupes. In both cases they are enemies to truth and sincerity, which
adorn and tend so greatly to promote the happiness of society, and
they ought to be exposed as such. For although men of penetration see
through the pretence, and escape its dangers, yet the weak, the vain,
and the unsuspicious are put off their guard, and have not discernment
enough to shun the trap so pleasingly baited. The Fable also furnishes
a hint against hypocritical, legacy hunters, whose regard is generally
of the same nature as that of the Fox for the Hen.








THE ASS IN THE LION’S SKIN.


An Ass, while feeding upon the coarse herbage by the edge of a wood,
found a Lion’s skin, and putting it on, went in this disguise into the
adjoining forests and pastures, and threw all the flocks and herds
into the greatest consternation and dismay. At length, his master,
who was in search of him, made his appearance, and the silly beast,
entertaining the idea of frightening him also, capered forward with a
terrific gait towards him; but the good man seeing his long ears stick
out, presently knew him, and with a stout cudgel made him sensible,
that notwithstanding his being dressed in a Lion’s skin, he was really
no more than an Ass.


APPLICATION.

As all affectation is wrong, and tends to expose and make a man
ridiculous, so the more distant he is from the thing which he affects
to appear, the stronger will be the ridicule which he excites, and
the greater the inconvenience into which he thereby runs himself. How
strangely absurd it is for a timorous person to procure a military
post, in order to keep himself out of danger! and to fancy a red coat
the surest protection for cowardice! Yet there have been those who
have purchased a commission to avoid being insulted; and have been so
silly as to think courage was interwoven with a sash, or tied up in
a cockade. But it would not be amiss for such gentlemen to consider
that it is not in the power of scarlet cloth to alter nature, and that
as it is expected a soldier should shew himself a man of courage and
intrepidity upon all proper occasions, they may by this means meet the
disgrace they intended to avoid, and appear greater Asses than they
needed to have done. However, it is not in point of fortitude only
that people are liable to expose themselves, by assuming a character
to which they are not equal; but he who puts on a shew of learning,
of religion, of a superior capacity in any respect, or in short, of
any virtue or knowledge, to which he has no proper claim, is, and will
always be found to be, an Ass in a Lion’s skin.






THE CLOWN AND THE GNAT.


As a clownish Fellow was sitting musing upon a bank, a Gnat alighted
upon his leg and bit it. He slapped his hand upon the place, with the
intention of crushing the assailant; but the little nimble insect
escaped between his fingers, and repeated its attacks. Every time he
struck at it, he gave himself a smart blow upon the leg, but missed his
aim. At this he became enraged, and in the height of his peevish and
impatient humour, he earnestly prayed to Hercules, beseeching him with
his mighty power to stretch forth his arm against a pernicious insect,
by which he was so miserably tormented.


APPLICATION.

He who suffers his mind to be ruffled by every little inconvenience,
subjects himself to perpetual uneasiness and disquiet. There is no
accident, however trivial, but is capable of disconcerting him, and
he becomes absurdly miserable on the most foolish occasion. His good
humour is soured in an instant, and he is rendered uncomfortable to
himself, and odious or ridiculous to all about him. He prays with
earnestness to the Supreme Being to aid him in all his paltry selfish
schemes, or to gratify vanities, for which, as a rational being, he
ought to blush and be ashamed. The imaginary distresses, which his
unfortunate disposition heightens into severe calamities, are matter
of diversion to those who are disposed to sneer at him; and when his
pettish humour makes him rave like a madman, and curse his fate, at the
dropping of a hat, or the blunder of a servant, even his friends must
view his behaviour with a mixed emotion of pity and contempt.








THE WOLF AND THE LAMB.


One hot sultry day, a Wolf and a Lamb happened to come just at the
same time, to quench their thirst in the stream of a brook that fell
tumbling down the side of a rocky mountain. The Wolf stood upon the
higher ground, and the Lamb at some distance below him. However, the
Wolf, having a mind to pick a quarrel with the Lamb, asked him what he
meant by disturbing the water, and making it so muddy that he could
not drink? and, at the same time, demanded satisfaction. The Lamb,
frightened at this threatening charge, told him, in a tone as mild as
possible, that with humble submission, he could not conceive how that
could be, since the water which he drank ran down from the Wolf to him,
and therefore could not be disturbed so far up the stream. Be that as
it may, replies the Wolf, you are a rascal, and I have been told that
you used ill language concerning me behind my back, about half a year
ago. Upon my word, says the Lamb, the time you mention was before I was
born. The Wolf, finding it to no purpose to argue any longer against
truth, fell into a great passion, snarling and foaming at the mouth as
if he had been mad; and drawing nearer to the Lamb, Sirrah, says he, if
it were not you, it was your father, and that is the same. So he seized
the poor innocent helpless thing, tore it to pieces, and made a meal of
it.


APPLICATION.

    Where’er oppression rules, fell Wolves devour;
    And the worst crimes are want of strength and pow’r.

They who do not feel the sentiments of humanity, will seldom listen
to the voice of reason; and when cruelty and injustice are armed with
power, and determined on oppression, the strongest pleas of innocence
are preferred in vain, and nothing is more easy than finding pretences
to criminate the unsuspecting victims of tyranny. How many of the
degenerate, corrupt, and arbitrary governments with which the civilized
world has been disfigured, have exercised their vengeance upon the
honest and virtuous, who have dared in bad times to speak the truth;
and how many men in private life are to be met with, whose wolfish
dispositions, and envious and rapacious tempers cannot bear to see
honest industry rear its head!






THE MICE IN COUNCIL.


The Mice called a general council, and after the doors were locked,
entered into a free consultation about ways and means how to render
themselves more secure from the danger of the Cat. Many schemes were
proposed, and much debate took place upon the matter. At last, a
young Mouse, in a fine florid speech, broached an expedient, which he
contended was the only one to put them entirely out of the power of the
enemy, and this was, that the Cat should wear a bell about her neck,
which, upon the least motion, would give the alarm, and be a signal for
them, to retire into their holes. This speech was received with great
applause, and it was even proposed by some, that the Mouse who had made
it should have the thanks of the assembly. Upon which, an old Mouse,
who had sat silent hitherto, gravely observed, that the contrivance
was admirable, and the author of it, without doubt, very ingenious; but
he thought it would not be so proper to vote him thanks, till he should
further inform them how the bell was to be fastened about the Cat’s
neck, and who would undertake the task.


APPLICATION.

It is easy for visionary projectors to devise schemes, and to descant
on their utility, which, after all, are found to be so impracticable,
or so difficult, that no man of solid judgment can be prevailed upon to
attempt putting them into execution. In all matters where the good of
the community is at stake, new projects should be carefully examined
in all their bearings, that the ruinous consequences which might
follow them may be avoided. All business of this import ought to be
left to the decision of such men only as are distinguished for their
good sense, probity, honour, and patriotism. When these have examined
them in all their different bearings, we may place confidence in their
labours, and adopt their plans; but the Fable teaches us not to listen
to those rash and ignorant politicians, who are always foisting their
schemes upon the public upon every occurrence of mal-administration,
without looking beneath the surface, or considering whether they be
practicable or otherwise.








THE APE CHOSEN KING.


On the death of the old Lion, without his leaving an heir, the beasts
assembled to choose another king of the forest in his stead. The crown
was tried on many a head, but did not sit easy upon any one. At length
the Ape putting it upon his own, declared that it fitted him quite
well, and after shewing them many antic tricks, he with a great deal
of grimace, and an affected air of wisdom, offered himself to fill the
high office. The silly creatures being pleased with him at the moment,
instantly, by a great majority, proclaimed him king. The Fox, quite
vexed to see his fellow-subjects act so foolishly, resolved to convince
them of their sorry choice, and knowing of a trap ready baited, at no
great distance, he addressed himself to King Ape, and told him that he
had discovered a treasure, which being found on the waste, belonged to
his Majesty. The Ape presently went to take possession of the prize;
but no sooner had he laid his paws upon the bait, than he was caught
fast in the trap. In this situation, between shame and anger, he
chattered out many bitter reproaches against the Fox, calling him rebel
and traitor, and threatening revenge: to all which Reynard gravely
replied, that this was nothing but a beginning of what he would meet
with in the high station his vanity had prompted him to aspire to, as
it was only one of the many traps that would be laid for him, and in
which he would be caught; but he hoped, this one might be a treasure to
him, if it operated as a caution, and served to put him in mind of the
false estimate he had put upon his abilities, in supposing, that with
his inexperienced empty pate, he could manage the weighty affairs of
state. He then, with a laugh, left him to be relieved from his peril by
one or other of his foolish loving subjects.


APPLICATION.

When Apes are in power, Foxes will never be wanting to play upon them.
Men shew their folly, rashness, and want of consideration, when they
elect rulers without the qualifications of integrity and abilities to
recommend them to the office; and the higher it is, the more important
it is to the interests of the community that it should be properly
filled. The Fable also shews the weakness of those who, through
self-conceit, aspire to any high station without the requisites to
befit them for it, and the want of which exposes authority to scorn.






THE OLD MAN AND DEATH.


A poor feeble old Man, who had crawled from his cottage into a
neighbouring wood to gather a few sticks, had made up his bundle, and
laying it over his shoulders, was trudging homewards; but what with
age, and the length of the way, he grew so faint and weak, that he sunk
under it, and as he sat upon the ground, called upon Death to come once
for all and ease him of his troubles. Death no sooner heard him, than
he came and demanded what he wanted? The poor old Creature, who little
thought Death was so near, frightened almost out of his senses with his
terrible aspect, answered him trembling, That having by chance let his
bundle of sticks fall, and being too infirm to get it up himself, he
had made bold to call upon him to help him; and he hoped his worship
was not offended with him for the liberty he had taken in craving his
assistance.


APPLICATION.

This Fable gives us a lively representation of the general behaviour
of mankind towards that grim king of terrors, Death. Such liberties do
they take with him behind his back, that upon every little accident
which happens in their way, Death is immediately called upon, and they
even wish it might be lawful for them to finish with their own hands
a life so odious, so perpetually tormenting, and vexatious. When, let
but Death make his appearance, and the very sense of his near approach
almost does the business: then it is that they change their minds,
and would be glad to come off so well as to have their old burthen
laid upon their shoulders again. But wise and good men know that care
and numberless disappointments must be their portion in their passage
through life, and know also that it is their duty to endure them with
patience; for he is the best and happiest man who neither wishes nor
fears the approach of Death.








THE TWO FROGS.


One hot sultry summer, the lakes and ponds being almost every where
dried up, a couple of Frogs agreed to travel together in search of
water. At last they came to a deep well, and sitting upon the brink of
it, began to consult whether they should leap in or not. One of them
was for it, urging that there was plenty of clear spring water, and no
danger of being disturbed. Well, says the other, all this may be true,
and yet I cannot come into your opinion for my life; for if the water
should happen to dry there too, how should we get out again?


APPLICATION.

    In human affairs, many stations we meet,
    Where ’tis easy to enter, but hard to retreat.

We ought never to change our situation in life, nor undertake any
action of importance, without first duly and deliberately weighing
the consequences that may follow, in all their different bearings. It
is commonly owing to the neglect of such wholesome precautions, that
numbers of young people are led into unfortunate matches, suddenly made
up; and others are from the same causes led into a round of profuse
living, or into gaming and other extravagant conduct, which is sure
to terminate in ruin. To look before we leap, is a maxim worthy of
being remembered by all ranks and conditions of men, from the lowest
to the highest: even kings may reap benefit by it; for when they
inconsiderately execute those schemes which their wicked counsellors
advise, they have often abundant reason to repent. By this blind
stupidity, wars are commenced, from which a state cannot be extricated
either with honour or safety; and unwise projects are encouraged by the
rash accession of those who never considered the consequences, or how
they were to get out, till they had plunged themselves irrecoverably
into them.








THE FOX AND THE BRIAR.


A Fox scrambling hastily over a hedge, in his flight from the hounds,
got his foot severely torn by a Briar. Smarting with the pain, he burst
into revilings and complaints at this treatment, which he declared he
little expected to meet with for only passing over a hedge; and he
could not help thinking it was very bad usage to be thus grappled by
the long arms, and cut and wounded by the sharp crooked spines of a
Briar. True, says the Briar, but recollect that you intended to have
made me serve your turn, and would, without ceremony, have trampled me
down to the ground: but none of your freedoms with me, Master Reynard;
you may make a convenience of others perhaps, but the family of the
Briars are not of that cast. Whoever presumes to use any impudent
familiarities with them, is sure to smart for it.


APPLICATION.

Presuming and arrogant people do not hesitate to make a convenience,
or a kind of stepping stone, of any one who will suffer them to do so;
and if they can only get their turn served, no matter how, they use no
ceremony, nor shew any delicacy in accomplishing their ends. But the
selfish and impudent gentry, who are so apt to take liberties of this
kind, now and then mistake their men, and are justly retorted upon; and
however upon these occasions they may be surprized and angry, others,
who are indifferent spectators, instead of viewing them as objects
of pity, feel a secret satisfaction in seeing them suffer, as proper
examples of justice.








THE MAN AND THE WEASEL.


A Man having caught a Weasel in his pantry, was just going to kill it,
when the little captive begged that he would not do so cruel a deed,
but spare his life; and he assured the Man that he was his friend, and
only entered his pantry with a view of destroying the mice with which
it was infested. That may be, said the Man, but you do not do this
with the intention of serving me, nor with any other view but that
of serving yourself; and besides, you are so ferocious and cruel a
little creature, that you kill every animal you have within your power,
without the least compunction, and seem to delight in killing for
killing’s sake; therefore, your pretensions to serve me, and your plea
for mercy, are good for nothing.


APPLICATION.

Many people in the world are ever ready to set up the pretensions of
their acting with zeal, purely to serve the public, and pretend that
it is through the warmth of their friendship that they do the same to
individuals; but the main spring of all the actions of the agents of
treachery, and of bad men, is set a-going with the view only of serving
themselves. It is thus that the unprincipled and mercenary thief-taker
would like well to be accounted a public spirited man; and he cannot
help boasting of his services as such. The hangman’s pretensions are
of the same kind: but however useful and necessary some of such a
description of men may be, to keep down the wicked part of mankind, who
are a nuisance to civilized society, yet the instruments themselves are
very like in character to the Weasel in the Fable. The same may be said
of those factious writers, who pester the public with their clamorous
charges, under the mask of patriotism, but whose real motive is either
to gain money by the sale of their highly seasoned scandals, or to run
down their corrupt opponents in order to obtain their places.








THE BOAR AND THE ASS.


An Ass happening to meet with a Boar, and being in a frolicsome
humour, and having a mind to shew some of his silly wit, began in a
sneering familiar style to accost the Boar with, So ho, brother, your
humble servant, how is all at home with you? The Boar, nettled at his
familiarity, muttered out, Brother indeed! then bristled up towards
him, told him he was surprized at his impudence, and was just going
to shew his resentment by giving him a rip in the flank: but wisely
stifling his passion, he contented himself with only saying, Go, thou
sorry beast! I could be easily and amply revenged upon thee; but I dont
care to foul my tusks with the blood of so base a creature!


APPLICATION.

It is no uncommon thing to meet with impudent fools, so very eager of
being thought wits, that they will run great hazards in attempting to
shew themselves such, and will often persist in their awkward raillery
to the last degree of offence. But these kind of folks, instead of
raising themselves into esteem, are held in contempt by men of sense;
and though the generous and the brave may scorn to suffer themselves to
be ruffled by the insolent behaviour of every ass that offends them,
yet such sparks must not from thence conclude, that they will not meet
with retorts in kind from men far superior to themselves in mental
endowments; or that their unseasoned wit will always escape a more
proper, but a different chastisement.








THE DOG AND THE SHEEP.


The Dog sued the Sheep for a debt, of which the Kite and the Wolf
were to be the judges. They, without debating long upon the matter,
or making any scruple for want of evidence, gave sentence for the
plaintiff, who immediately tore the poor Sheep in pieces, and divided
the spoil with the unjust judges.


APPLICATION.

Of the many evils which throw back the well-being of society, none
raise in the honest mind more painful and indignant feelings, than
beholding the judgment seat of mercy and justice filled by an unjust,
corrupt, and wicked judge, who has become, step by step, hardened in
his impious enormities, and is the fully-prepared tool and supporter
of tyranny and arbitrary power. Fraud and oppression follow in his
train: the righteous laws of a just government are frittered away, or
superseded: truth and innocence are obnoxious; honesty is sneered at,
and it becomes criminal to espouse the cause of virtue. In this state
of things, wickedness predominates, and its rapacious abettors give
full scope to the exercise of all kind of oppression and injustice,
to gratify their own vicious lusts. Then it is that mankind are made
to feel the evils of power being in the hands of the worst of their
species, who, without hesitation, rob them of their property, and
divide the spoils. If there be not a sufficiency of the most spirited
and virtuous patriotism to rescue the country from their fangs, then is
despotism and degradation near at hand.








JUPITER AND THE HERDSMAN.


A Herdsman missing a young heifer, went up and down the forest to seek
it; and having walked over a great deal of ground to no purpose, he
fell a praying to Jupiter for relief, promising to sacrifice a kid
to him, if he would help him to a discovery of the thief. After this
he went on a little farther, and came near a grove of oaks, where he
espied the carcase of his heifer, and a Lion growling over it, and
feeding upon it. This sight almost scared him out of his wits; so down
he fell upon his knees once more, and addressing himself to Jupiter, O
Jupiter, says he, I promised thee a kid to shew me the thief; but now I
promise thee a bull, if thou wilt be so merciful as to deliver me out
of his clutches.


APPLICATION.

We ought never to supplicate the Divine power, but through motives
of religion and virtue. Prayers dictated by blind self-interest,
or to gratify some misguided passion, cannot, it is presumed, be
acceptable to the Deity; and of all the involuntary sins which men
commit, scarcely any are more frequent than their praying absurdly
and improperly, as well as unseasonably, when their time might have
been employed to a better purpose. Would men, as they ought to do,
obey the commands of Omnipotence, by fulfilling their moral duties,
and endeavour with all their might to live as justly as they can, a
just Providence would give them what they ought to have: but stupidity
and ignorance, until better informed, and divested of superstition
and bigotry, will continue to form their notions of the Supreme Being
from their own poor shallow conceptions; and nothing contributes
more to keep up this injudicious practice among simple, but perhaps
well-meaning people, than the numerous collections of those crude
rhapsodies, the offspring of itinerant bigotry, with which the country
overflows; while most of those prayers are neglected which have been
composed with due reflection and matured deliberation, by the most
learned and pious of men. This Fable also teaches us, that frequently
the gratification of our vain prayers would only lead us into dangers
and evils, of the existence of which we had no previous suspicion.






THE OLD LION.


A Lion, that in the prime of his life had been very rapacious and
cruel, was reduced by age and infirmities to extreme feebleness.
Several of the beasts of the forest, who had been great sufferers
by him, now came and revenged themselves upon him. The Boar ripped
him with his tusks, the Bull gored him with his horns, and others in
various ways had each a stroke at him. When the Ass saw that they might
do all this without any danger, he also came and threw his heels in
the Lion’s face. Upon which, the poor expiring tyrant is said to have
groaned out these words: Alas! how grievous is it to suffer insults,
even from the brave and valiant; but to be spurned at by so base a
creature as this, is worse than dying ten thousand deaths!


APPLICATION.

When men in power lose sight of justice and mercy, and cruelly and
unjustly tyrannise over the people under their sway, they never will
gain sincere reverence or respect from the rest of mankind. The
injuries they inflict in the hey-day of their wicked career, will be
remembered with detestation through life; and when age and impotence
lay hold of them, they must not expect to meet with friends they
never deserved; but may be certain of being treated with neglect and
contempt, and the baser their enemies are, the more insolent and
intolerable will be the affront. It will then be discovered, with
bitter remorse, that the days have passed away, in which virtue and
dignity ought to have laid the foundation of a reputation which would
have been the solace of old age, and also extended a good name to
posterity with feelings of veneration; instead of which the remembrance
of past crimes will haunt the guilty mind, and the unjust man will at
last be thrown into the grave with the common dust, amidst the whispers
of “Let him go,” and he will be no more remembered than the animals on
which he feasted, or the herbage which was cut down when he was a child.








THE MAGPIE AND THE SHEEP.


A Magpie sat chattering upon the back of a Sheep, and pulling off the
wool to line her nest. Peace, you noisy thing, says the Sheep: if I
were a dog, you durst not serve me so. That is true enough, replies
the Magpie, I know very well whom I have to deal with: I never meddle
with the surly and revengeful; but I love to plague such poor helpless
creatures as you are, who cannot do me any harm.


APPLICATION.

It is the characteristic of a mean, low, base spirit, to be insolent
or tyrannical to those who are obliged to submit to it, and slavishly
submissive to those who have the spirit and the power to resist. Men of
this stamp take especial care not to meddle with people of their own
malicious principles, for fear of meeting with a suitable return; but
they delight in doing mischief for mischief’s sake, and seem pleased
when they can insult the innocent with impunity. This kind of behaviour
is inconsistent with all the rules of honour and generosity, and is
opposite to every thing that is great, good, amiable, and praise-worthy.








THE FOX AND THE STORK.


The Fox invited the Stork to dinner, and, being disposed to divert
himself at the expence of his guest, provided nothing for the
entertainment but soup, which he served up in a wide shallow dish.
This the Fox could lap up with a great deal of ease; but the Stork,
who could but just dip in the point of his bill, was not a bit the
better for his entertainment. However, a few days after, he returned
the compliment, and invited the Fox; but suffered nothing to be brought
to table excepting some minced meat in a glass jar, the neck of which
was so deep, and so narrow, that, though the Stork with his long bill
made a shift to fill his belly, all that the Fox, who was very hungry,
could do, was to lick the brims as the Stork slabbered them with his
eating. Reynard was heartily vexed at first; but when he came to take
his leave, owned ingenuously, that he had been used as he deserved; and
that he had no reason to take any treatment ill, of which himself had
set the example.


APPLICATION.

It is very imprudent, as well as uncivil, to affront any one, and we
should always reflect, before we rally another, whether we can bear to
have the jest retorted. Whoever takes the liberty to exercise his witty
talent in that way, must not be surprised if he meet reprisals in the
end. Indeed, if all those who are thus paid in their own coin, would
take it with the same frankness that the Fox did, the matter would not
be much; but we are too apt, when the jest comes to be turned home upon
ourselves, to think that insufferable in another which we looked upon
as pretty and facetious when the humour was our own. The rule of doing
as we would be done by, so proper to be our model in every transaction
of life, may more particularly be of use in this respect. People seldom
or never receive any advantage by these little ludicrous impositions;
and yet, if they were to ask themselves the question, would find, that
they would receive the same treatment from another with a very bad
grace.








THE COUNTRYMAN AND THE SNAKE.


A Villager found a Snake under a hedge, almost dead with cold. Having
compassion on the poor creature, he brought it home, and laid it upon
the hearth near the fire, where it had not lain long before it revived
with the heat, and began to erect itself, and fly at the wife and
children of its preserver, filling the whole cottage with its frightful
hissings. The Countryman hearing an outcry, came in, and perceiving how
the matter stood, took up a mattock, and soon dispatched the ingrate,
upbraiding him at the same time in these words: Is this, vile wretch,
the reward you make to him that saved your life? Die, as you deserve;
but a single death is too good for you.


APPLICATION.

There are some minds so depraved, and entirely abandoned to wickedness,
so dead to all virtuous feelings, that the tenderness and humanity of
others, though exerted in their own favour, not only fail to make a
proper impression of gratitude upon them, but are not able to restrain
them from repaying benevolence with injuries. Moralists, in all
ages, have incessantly declaimed against the enormity of this crime,
concluding that they who are capable of injuring their benefactors,
are not fit to live in a community; being such as the natural ties of
parent, friend, or country are too weak to restrain within the bounds
of society. Indeed, the sin of ingratitude is so detestable, that none
but the basest tempers can be guilty of it. Men of low grovelling
minds, who have been rescued from indigence by the hand of benevolence,
or of charity, forget their benefactors, as well as their original
wretchedness; and as soon as prosperity flows upon them, it too often
serves only to rekindle their native rancour and venom, and they hiss
and brandish their tongues against those who are so inadvertent or
unfortunate as to have served them. But prudent people need not to be
admonished on this subject; for they know how much it behoves them to
beware of taking a snake into their bosom.








THE COCK AND THE FOX.


A Cock, perched upon a lofty tree, crowed so loud, that his voice
echoed through the wood, and drew to the place a Fox, who was prowling
in quest of prey. But Reynard finding the Cock was inaccessible, had
recourse to stratagem to decoy him down. Approaching the tree, Cousin,
says he, I am heartily glad to see you; but I cannot forbear expressing
my uneasiness at the inconvenience of the place, which will not let
me pay my respects to you in a better manner, though I suppose you
will come down presently, and that difficulty will be removed. Indeed,
cousin, says the Cock, to tell you the truth, I do not think it safe to
venture upon the ground; for, though I am convinced how much you are my
friend, yet I may have the misfortune to fall into the clutches of some
other beast, and what will become of me then? O dear, says Reynard,
is it possible you do not know of the peace that has been so lately
proclaimed between all kinds of birds and beasts; and that we are for
the future to forbear hostilities, and to live in harmony, under the
severest penalties. All this while the Cock seemed to give little
attention to what was said, but stretched out his neck as if he saw
something at a distance. Cousin, says the Fox, what is that you look
at so earnestly? Why, says the Cock, I think I see a pack of hounds
yonder, a good way off. O then, says the Fox, your humble servant, I
must be gone. Nay, pray cousin do not go, says the Cock, I am just
coming down; sure you are not afraid of the dogs in these peaceable
times. No, no, says he; but ten to one whether they have yet heard of
the proclamation!


APPLICATION.

The moral of this Fable principally instructs us not to be too
credulous in believing the insinuations of those who are already
distinguished by their want of faith and honesty, for perfidious
people ought ever to be suspected in the reports that favour their own
interest. When, therefore, any such would draw us into a compliance
with their destructive measures, by a pretended civility, or plausible
relation, we should consider such proposals as a bait, artfully
placed to conceal some fatal hook, which is intended to draw us into
danger; and if by any simple counterplot we can unmask the design and
defeat the schemes of the wicked, it will not only be innocent, but
praise-worthy.






THE HARE AND THE TORTOISE.


A Hare vainly boasting of her great speed in running, and casting a
look of disdain upon a Tortoise, that was slowly moving along, What
a poor crawling thing are you! said she: I can go over a territory
of country with the velocity of the wind, while you are an hour in
accomplishing a journey of half a furlong. In a race I could leave you
twenty miles behind me, in the time you were about reaching the end of
one. I don’t know that, said the Tortoise, and will give you a trial.
Upon this, a match was made to run a certain distance, and the Fox, who
had heard the dispute, was chosen umpire of the race. They then started
together, and away went the Hare with great swiftness, and soon left
the Tortoise out of sight, and thinking herself certain of winning the
race, she made a jest of the matter, squatted down in a tuft of fern,
and took a nap, concluding she could easily make up the lost ground,
should the Tortoise at any time pass by. Indulging in this security,
she over-slept herself, until the Tortoise, in a continued steady pace,
arrived first at the fixed distance, and won the race.


APPLICATION.

We must not flatter ourselves with coming to the end of our journey in
time, if we sleep by the way; and unnecessary delays, in all pressing
affairs, are just so much time lost. Action is an important part of the
business of life; and “up and be doing” is a motto we ought to keep
in mind, as it has guided many a plain plodding man, with steady aim,
to carry his point effectually in making his own fortune, and at the
same time gaining the esteem of the world. Industry and application to
business make amends for the want of a quick and ready wit; but men of
great natural abilities, and vivacity of imagination, often presume too
much upon the superiority of their genius, and if to this presumption
they add pride and conceit, they despise the drudgery of business, and
suffer their affairs to go to disorder or ruin, through idleness and
neglect.








THE BLACKAMOOR.


A Man having bought a Blackamoor, was so simple as to think that the
colour of his skin was only dirt which he had contracted for want of
due care under his former master. This fault he fancied might easily
be removed by washing, so he ordered the poor Black to be put into a
tub, and was at a considerable charge in providing ashes, soap, and
scrubbing brushes for the operation. To work they went, rubbing and
scouring his skin all over, but to no manner of purpose: for when they
had repeated their washings several times, and were grown quite weary,
all they got by it was, that the Blackamoor caught cold and died.


APPLICATION.

    “What’s bred in the bone will never come out of the flesh.”

Nature cannot by any art or labour be changed; she may indeed be
wrought upon and moulded by good council and discipline; but it is
in vain to attempt a total transformation of our genius, person, or
complexion: therefore our application, assiduity, and pains, when
wrong directed, are of no avail. We should, indeed, strive to discover
which way the bent of our genius lies, that we may apply ourselves
to a judicious cultivation and improvement of it; but we ought to be
sure never to thwart or oppose nature’s fixed laws. When men aspire to
eminence in any of the various arts or sciences, without being gifted
with the innate powers or abilities for such attainments, it is only
like attempting to wash the Blackamoor white.








THE LION IN LOVE.


The Lion by chance saw a fair maid, the forester’s daughter, as she
was tripping over a lawn, and fell in love with her. Nay, so violent
was his passion, that he could not live unless he made her his own;
therefore, without more delay, he broke his mind to the father, and
demanded the damsel for his wife. The man, odd as the proposal seemed
at first, soon recollected that, by complying, he might get the Lion
into his power; but, by refusing him, should only exasperate and
provoke his rage. Accordingly, he seemed to consent; but told him it
must be upon these conditions: that, considering the girl was young and
tender, he must let his teeth be plucked out, and his claws be cut off,
lest he should hurt her, or at least frighten her with the apprehension
of them. The Lion was too much in love to hesitate; but was no sooner
deprived of his teeth and claws, than the treacherous forester
attacked him with a huge club, and knocked out his brains.


APPLICATION.

Of all the ill consequences that may attend the blind passion of love,
few prove so fatal as that of its drawing people into a sudden and
ill-concerted marriage. In the midst of a fit of madness, they commit
a rash act, of which, as soon as they come to themselves, they find
reason to repent as long as they live. Many an unthinking young man
has been treated as much like a savage in this respect as the Lion in
the Fable. He has, perhaps, had nothing valuable belonging to him but
his estate, and the documents which formed his title to it; and if he
is so far captivated, as to be persuaded to part with these, his teeth
and his claws are gone, and he lies entirely at the mercy of madam and
her relations, who will most likely not fail to keep him in complete
subjection, after they have stripped him of all his power. Nothing but
a true friendship, and a mutual interest, can keep up a reciprocal love
between the conjugal pair, and when these are wanting, contempt and
aversion soon step in to supply their place. Matrimony then becomes a
state of downright enmity and hostility; and what a miserable case he
must be in, who has put himself and his whole power into the hands of
his enemy. Let those reflect upon this (while they are in their sober
senses) who abhor the thoughts of being betrayed into their ruin, by
following the impulse of a blind unheeding passion.






THE FOX AND THE HEDGEHOG.


A Fox, in swimming across a river, was forced down by the rapidity of
the stream to a place where the bank was so steep and slippery, that he
could not ascend it. While he was struggling in this situation, a swarm
of flies settled on his head and eyes, and tormented him grievously.
A Hedgehog, who saw and pitied his condition, offered to call in the
assistance of the Swallow to drive them away. No, no, friend, replies
the Fox, I thank you for your kind offer; but it is better to let this
swarm alone, for they are already pretty well filled, and should they
be driven away, a fresh and more hungry set would succeed them, and
suck me until I should not have a drop of blood left in my veins.


APPLICATION.

This Fable is recorded by Aristotle, who tells us that Æsop spoke it to
the Samians on occasion of a popular sedition, to dissuade them from
deposing their great minister of state, lest they might, in getting
rid of one who was already glutted with their spoils, make room for a
more hungry and rapacious one in his stead. By this it would appear,
that some ministers of state in ancient times, instead of being guided
by integrity and patriotism, were intent only upon filling their own
coffers, and aggrandizing and enriching their own relations, from the
plunder of the people whose affairs they were entrusted with; and
that they considered them as their prey, rather than their charge. A
succession of such ministers, who can be countenanced by weak monarchs
only, is more calamitous to a nation than plague, pestilence, and
famine; for the effects of their mal-administration do not end with
their wicked lives, but lay the foundation of ruin to nations that
would, under a patriotic government, have been virtuous, great, and
flourishing.








THE SPARROW AND THE HARE.


A Hare being seized by an Eagle, squeaked out in a most woful manner.
A Sparrow, that sat upon a tree just by, and saw the affair, could not
forbear being unseasonably witty, but called out to the Hare: So, ho!
what, sit there and be killed! prithee up and away; I dare say if you
would but try, so swift a creature as you are would easily escape from
an Eagle. As he was going on with his cruel raillery, down came a Hawk
and snapped him up, and notwithstanding his cries and lamentations,
fell to devouring him in an instant. The Hare, who was just expiring,
addressing her last words to the Sparrow, said, You who just now
insulted my misfortune, with so much security as you thought, may
please to shew us how well you can bear the like, now it has befallen
you.


APPLICATION.

To insult people in distress, is the characteristic of a cruel,
indiscreet, and giddy temper; and he must surely have a very bad
heart, and no very good head, who can look on the day of grief, and
the hour of distress, as a time for impertinent raillery. If any other
arguments were necessary, or might be supposed capable of enforcing
moral precepts on those who cannot be actuated by humanity, it might
be added, that the vicissitudes of human affairs render such behaviour
imprudent, as well as barbarous; since we cannot tell how soon we may
be ourselves reduced to lament the woes which are now the objects of
our derision: for nobody knows whose turn may be the next.








THE MAN AND HIS TWO WIVES.


A Man, in times when polygamy was allowed, had two wives, one of
whom, like himself, had seen her best days, and was verging upon the
decline of life, but possessed many engaging qualities. The other was
young and beautiful, and shared the affection of her husband, whom
she made as happy as he was capable of being, but was not completely
so herself. The white hairs mixed with the black upon the good man’s
head, gave her some uneasiness, by proclaiming the great disparity of
their years; wherefore, under colour of dressing his head, she plucked
out the silver hairs, that he might still have as few visible signs
of an advanced age as possible. The older dame, for reasons directly
opposite, esteemed these grey locks as the honours of his head, and
thought, while they gave him a venerable look, they made her appear
something younger, so that every time she combed his head, she took
equal pains to extirpate the black hairs. Each continued her project,
unknown to the other, until the poor man, who thought their desire to
oblige him put them upon this extraordinary officiousness in dressing
his head, found himself without any hair at all!


APPLICATION.

As Christianity has banished polygamy, no immediate moral can be
derived by husbands from this Fable, unless we conclude, that it is
as impossible to serve two mistresses as two masters; for whatever we
do to please the one, will probably offend the other. To conciliate
the affections of persons whose tempers are opposite, is extremely
difficult, if not impracticable. To wives it may teach, that those
whose love is tempered with a tolerable share of good sense, will
be sure to have no separate views of their own, nor do any thing
immediately relating to their husbands, without consulting them first.
All that we shall add to what has been said, is to observe, that many
women may ignorantly, out of a pure effect of complaisance, do a
thousand disagreeable things to their husbands. But in a married state,
one party should not be guessing at or presuming, but inform themselves
certainly, what will please the other; and if a wife use her husband
like a friend only, the least she can do is first to communicate to
him all the important enterprizes she undertakes, and especially those
which she intends should be for his honour and advantage.






MERCURY AND THE CARVER.


Mercury being very desirous to know what credit he had obtained in
the world, and how he was esteemed among mankind, disguised himself,
and went to the shop of a famous Statuary, where images were to be
sold. He saw Jupiter, Juno, and himself, and most of the other gods
and goddesses: so, pretending that he wanted to buy, he asked the
prices of several, and at length pointing to Jupiter, What, says he,
is the lowest price you will take for that? A crown, says the other;
and what for that? pointing to Juno: I must have something more for
that. Mercury then, casting his eye upon the figure of himself, with
all his symbols about it, Here am I, said he to himself, in quality of
Jupiter’s messenger, and the patron of artisans, with all my trades
about me; and then smiling with a self-sufficient air, and pointing to
the image, and pray friend, what is the price of this elegant figure?
Oh, replied the Statuary, if you will buy Jupiter and Juno, I will
throw you that into the bargain.


APPLICATION.

If we knew ourselves, of what could any of us be vain? Vanity is the
fruit of ignorance, and the froth of perverted pride. Humility is the
constant attendant on men of great talents and good qualities: these
enable them to see how far they are short of perfection; but the vain
and arrogant conceive they have attained its height. All vain men, who
affect popularity, fancy other people have the same opinion of them
that they have of themselves; but nothing makes them look so cheap
and little in the eyes of discerning people as their enquiring (like
Mercury in the Fable) after their own worth, and wanting to know what
value others set upon them: and those who are so full of themselves,
as to hunt for praise, and lay traps for commendation, will generally
be disappointed, and be marked out as the emptiest of fellows; for
it argues a littleness of mind to be too anxious and solicitous
concerning our fame. He that behaves himself as he should do, need not
fear procuring a good share of respect, and a fair reputation; but
then these should not be the end or the motive of our pursuits: our
principal aim should be the welfare of our country, our friends, and
ourselves, and should be directed by the rules of honour and virtue.






THE FOX AND THE GOAT.


A Fox having tumbled, by chance, into a well, had been ineffectually
endeavouring a long while to get out again, when, at last, a Goat came
to the place, and wanting to drink, asked Reynard whether the water was
good? Good! said he, aye, so sweet, that I am afraid I have surfeited
myself, I have drank so abundantly. The Goat, upon this, without more
consideration, leapt in; when the Fox mounted upon his back, and taking
the advantage of his horns, bounded up in an instant, and left the poor
simple Goat at the bottom of the well to shift for himself. Upon the
Goat’s reproaching him for his perfidy, Ah, Master Goat, said he, you
have far more hairs in your beard than brains in your head.


APPLICATION.

Credulity may be said to be the child of ignorance, and the mother
of distress. A wise man will not suffer himself to be imposed upon
by slender artifices and idle tales; but the credulous man is easily
deluded, and subjects himself to numberless misfortunes. He is ever
the dupe of designing knaves, and of needy adventurers, who are always
intent upon serving themselves at the expence of others. They fasten
upon opulent men of weak minds, as the objects of delusion, and for
this purpose, tempt them with proposals of apparently advantageous
schemes, which they have ready made out, to entice their victims to
embark along with them. By credulity, they hope to establish their own
fortune, and provided this be done, they care not, even if the ruin of
their unsuspecting associates follow. It will likewise ever be found
that when an honest man and a knave happen to become partners in the
same common interest, the latter, whenever necessity pinches, will be
sure to shift for himself, and leave the former in the lurch.








JUNO AND THE PEACOCK.


The Peacock complained to Juno, how hardly he was used in not having
so good a voice as the Nightingale. That little bird, says he, charms
every ear with his melody, while my hoarse screamings disgust every
one who hears them. The Goddess, concerned at the uneasiness of her
favourite bird, answered him very kindly to this purpose: If the
Nightingale be blest with a fine voice, you have the advantage in point
of beauty and majesty of person. Ah! said the Peacock, but what avails
my silent unmeaning beauty, when I am so far excelled in voice? The
Goddess dismissed him with this advice: Consider that the properties
of every creature were appointed by the decree of fate: to you beauty;
strength to the Eagle; to the Nightingale a voice of melody; the
faculty of speech to the Parrot; and to the Dove innocence. Each of
these is contented with his own peculiar quality; and unless you have a
mind to be miserable, you must learn to be so too.


APPLICATION.

The most useful lesson that we can possibly learn, towards the
attainment of happiness in this world, is to enjoy those blessings
that we have in our power, without vainly pining after those which
we have not. Instead of being ambitious of having more endowments
than nature has allotted to us, we should spare no pains to cultivate
those we have; and which a sourness or peevishness of temper, instead
of improving, will certainly lessen and impair. Whoever neglects the
happiness within his reach, in order to brood over the consideration
of how much happier he might have been, had his situation been like
that of others, ingeniously contrives to torment himself, and opens a
perpetual source of discontent, which prevents his ever being at ease.
He does not reflect, or he would soon discover, that all the desirable
properties in the world never centered in one man, and that those who
have had the greatest share of them, if of an unhappy disposition,
still wished for something more, and wanted to possess some inherent
gifts which shone forth in other men: but such persons ought to be
put in mind, that it does not become mortals to repine at the will of
Heaven, which distributes happiness with an equal hand upon the highest
and the lowest of mankind, if they were wise enough, and grateful
enough, to perceive it.






THE LION AND OTHER BEASTS.


The Lion having entered into an alliance with other Beasts of prey,
it was agreed, for their mutual advantage, that they should hunt in
company, and divide the spoil. They accordingly met on a certain day,
and commenced the chase, and ere long they ran down and killed a fine
fat Deer, which was instantly divided into four parts, there happening
to be then only the Lion and three others present. After the division
was made, the Lion advancing forward with an air of majesty, and
pointing to one of the shares, was pleased to declare himself after the
following manner: This I take possession of as my right, which devolves
to me, as I am descended by a true, lineal, hereditary succession from
the royal family of Lion: that, pointing to the second, I claim by, I
think, no unreasonable title, considering that the success of all the
engagements you have with the enemy depends chiefly upon my courage
and conduct; and you very well know that wars are too expensive to
be carried on without large supplies. Then, nodding his head towards
the third, that I shall take by virtue of my prerogative, to which I
make no question but so dutiful and loyal a people will pay all the
deference and regard that I can desire. Now, as for the remaining part,
the necessity of our present affairs is so very urgent, our stock so
low, and our credit so impaired and weakened, that I must insist upon
your granting that without hesitation or demur; and hereof fail not at
your peril.


APPLICATION.

No alliance is safe which is made with the wicked, if they be superior
to us in power. The most solemn treaties will be disregarded as soon as
they can be broken with advantage. Powerful potentates, when they are
regardless of moral obligation, and consider might only to be right,
will never want specious pretences to furbish out their declarations
of war, nor hesitate about inveigling less powerful states to join
them, and after subduing the enemy, and seizing upon the spoils, will
fall upon their allies on the slightest pretences, or for no better
reason but because they are powerful enough to do so. No man ought to
be entrusted with unlimited power; and when a community has been stupid
enough to put the management of their affairs into such hands, they
have ever found their confidence abused, and their property invaded.






JUPITER AND PALLAS.


Once upon a time, the Heathen Gods agreed to adopt each a particular
tree into their patronage. Jupiter chose the Oak; Venus was pleased
to name the Myrtle; Apollo pitched upon the Laurel; Cybele took the
Pine; and Hercules the Poplar. Pallas being present, expressed her
surprise at their fancy, in making choice of trees that bore nothing.
Oh, says Jupiter, the reason of that is plain enough, for we would not
be thought to dispense our favours with any mercenary view. You may do
as you please, says she, but let the Olive be my tree; and I declare
my reason for choosing it is, because it bears plenty of noble useful
fruit. Upon which the Thunderer, putting on a serious composed gravity,
spoke thus to the Goddess: Indeed daughter, it is not without cause
that you are so celebrated for your wisdom; for unless some benefit
attend our actions, to perform them for the sake of glory is but a
silly business.


APPLICATION.

In all our actions, we should intend something useful and beneficial;
for the standing value of all things is in proportion to their use. To
undertake affairs with no other view but that of empty glory, whatever
some curious dreamers may fancy, is employing our time after a very
foolish manner. The Almighty created the world out of his infinite
goodness, for the good of his creatures, and not out of a passion for
glory, which is a vain, silly, mean principle; and when we talk of
glorifying the Author of our being, if we think reasonably, we must
mean shewing our gratitude to him, by imitating this goodness of his,
as far as we are able, and endeavouring to make some good or other the
aim of all our undertakings. For if empty glory be unworthy the pursuit
of a wise man, how vastly improper must it be to make an offering of it
to an all-wise Deity.








THE VIPER AND THE FILE.


A Viper having entered a smith’s shop, looked up and down for something
to eat; when, casting his eye upon a file, he greedily seized upon it,
and fell to gnawing it with his teeth. After he had spent some time
in his attempts to devour it, the File told him very gruffly, that he
had better be quiet and let him alone; for he would get very little by
nibbling at one who, upon occasion, could bite iron and steel.


APPLICATION.

This Fable is levelled at those spiteful people who take so malignant a
pleasure in the design of hurting others, as not to feel and understand
that they hurt only themselves; and at those who are blinded by
envy, which prompts them rather than not bite at all, to fall foul
where they cannot expect their nibbling will meet with any thing but
disappointment, as every one must who is biting at that which is too
hard for his teeth. Thus it is that spite and malignity, which are twin
brothers, and the offspring of envy, are, as well as their parent,
their own tormentors. They intend that the wounds they inflict should
be deadly, and the greatest wits and brightest characters in all ages
have been the objects of their attacks; but the brilliancy of truth
and justice at length shines forth, and shews the deformity of such
characters in the clearest light. Other people, of the same character
and disposition, though of minor consideration indeed, ought not to
be passed over unnoticed. These may be called nibblers, who let their
tongues slip very freely, in censuring the actions of persons who, in
the esteem of the world, are of such an unquestionable reputation,
that nobody will believe what is insinuated against them, and of such
influence through their own veracity, that the least word from them
would ruin the credit of such adversaries to all intents and purposes.
The efforts of little villains of this stamp, like dirty liquor
squirted against the wind, recoil back and bespatter their own faces;
or like the shades of a picture, serve to set off the brilliant tints
of the opposite virtues, which support and adorn society.








THE WOLF IN SHEEP’S CLOTHING.


A Wolf disguising himself in the skin of a sheep, and getting in
among the flock, easily caught and devoured many of them. At last the
Shepherd discovered him, and cunningly watched the opportunity of
slipping a noose about his neck, and immediately hung him up on the
branch of a tree. Some other Shepherds observing what he was about,
drew near and expressed their surprize at it. Brother Shepherd! says
one of them, what! are you hanging your sheep? No, replies the other,
but I am hanging a Wolf in Sheep’s clothing, and shall never fail to do
the same, whenever I can catch one of them in that garb. The Shepherds
then expressed themselves pleased at his dexterity, and applauded the
justice of the execution.


APPLICATION.

We ought not to judge of men by their looks, or their dress and
appearances, but by the character of their lives and conversation,
and by their works; for when we do not examine these, we must not be
surprized if we find that we have mistaken evil for good, and instead
of an innocent sheep, taken a wolf in disguise under our protection.
The finished hypocrite, by assuming the character of virtue, makes the
vice more odious and abominable, and when the mask is torn off, and
fraud and imposture are detected, every honest man rejoices in the
punishment of the offender. Men who have not had good, religious, and
moral principles early instilled into their minds, find no barrier to
check their propensity to evil, and get hardened as they advance in
years; and even the most liberal education, if it want the foundation
of truth and honesty, is often a curse instead of a blessing, and
the objects of it fail to do honour either to themselves or to their
country. Thus it is we see tyranny stalking along under the mask of
care and protection. Injustice sets up the letter of the law against
its spirit. Oppression strips the widow and the orphan, and at the same
time preaches up mercy and compassion. Treachery covers itself under
a cloak of kindness; and above all, it is peculiarly painful to find
numbers of men, even of the learned professions, who ought to set an
example of probity and honour, misapply their abilities to twist and
pervert the sacred meaning of both law and gospel to the basest and
worst of purposes.






THE STAG IN THE OX-STALL.


A Stag, pursued by the hunters, took refuge in a stable, and begged
of the Oxen, to suffer him to conceal himself under the straw in one
of the stalls. They told him that he would be in great danger there,
for both the master and the servants would soon come to fodder them,
and then he might be sure of meeting his doom. Ah! says the Stag, if
you will be so good as not betray me, I hope I shall be safe enough.
Presently, in came a servant, who gave a careless look around, and
then went out without any discovery. All the other servants of the
farm came and went like the first. Upon this, the Stag began to exult,
imagining himself quite secure; but a shrewd old Ox told him that he
was reckoning upon his safety too soon, for there was another person to
come, by whom he would not so readily be looked over. Accordingly, by
and by came the master, who carefully peeped into every corner, and at
last, in turning over the litter, discovered the Stag’s horns sticking
out of the straw: upon which, he called all his servants back, and soon
made prize of the poor creature.


APPLICATION.

This Fable is levelled against those worthless hirelings, who slide
over their time in negligent disorder, and this not so much for want of
capacity as honesty; their own private interest almost solely occupying
their attention, while that of their master, whose wages they receive,
and whose bread they eat, is postponed, or entirely neglected. Such
servants deserve not to be inmates in any good man’s house; but where
they are, it is absolutely necessary for the governors of families to
look into their affairs with their own eyes; for though they may happen
not to be in personal danger from the treachery of their domestics,
they are perpetually liable to injuries from their negligence, which
leaves the master open to the artifices of those who would defraud him.
Few families are reduced to poverty merely by their own extravagance:
the inattention of servants swells every article of expence in domestic
economy; and the retinue of great men, instead of exerting their
industry to increase their master’s wealth, commonly exercise no other
office than that of caterpillars, to consume and devour it. The fate
of the Stag also warns us not to engage in any hazardous speculation,
the success of which is to depend upon the ignorance or carelessness
of those with whom we have to deal; for though we may over-reach one
or two, yet some master-eye is sure at last to pierce our covering of
straw, and make us pay dearly for deviating from the straight road of
candour and prudence.






THE FOWLER AND THE RING-DOVE.


A Fowler took his gun, and went into the woods a-shooting. He spied a
Ring-dove among the branches of an Oak, and clapping the piece to his
shoulder, took his aim, and made himself sure of killing it. But just
as he was going to pull the trigger, an Adder, which he had trod upon
under the grass, bit him so painfully in the leg, that he was obliged
to quit his design, and throw his gun down in an agony. The venom
immediately infected his blood, and his whole body began to mortify;
which, when he perceived, he could not help owning it to be just. Fate,
says he, has brought destruction upon me, while I was contriving the
death of another.


APPLICATION.

The mischief that bad men meditate to others, commonly, like a
judgment, falls upon their own heads; and the punishment of wickedness
is so just in itself that the sufferer, who has made others feel it,
cannot, if he think rightly, but confess that he deserves the like
inflicted on himself. The hardened unfeeling heart of a cruel and
unjust man, can, however, continue to do a thousand bitter things to
others, until he tastes calamity himself, and then only it is that he
feels the insupportable uneasiness it occasions. Why should we think
others born to hard treatment more than ourselves, or imagine it can be
reasonable to do to another what we should think very hard to suffer in
our own persons?








THE HARES AND THE FROGS.


The Hares in a certain park having met to consult upon some plan to
preserve themselves from their numerous enemies, all agreed that life
was full of care and misery, and that they saw no prospect of things
changing for the better. Full of these desponding thoughts, and just as
it had been proposed that they should put an end to their existence, a
storm arose, which tore the branches from the trees, and whirled the
leaves about their ears. Panic-struck, they ran like mad creatures,
until they were stopped by a lake, into which they hastily resolved to
throw themselves headlong, rather than lead a life so full of dangers
and crosses: but upon their approaching its margin, a number of Frogs,
which were sitting there, frightened at their sudden approach, in the
greatest confusion leapt into the water, and dived to the bottom; which
an old Hare, more sedate than the rest, observing, called out, Have
a care what ye do! Here are other creatures I perceive, which have
their fears as well as we. Dont then let us fancy ourselves the most
miserable of any upon earth; but rather, by their example, learn to
bear patiently those inconveniences which nature has thrown upon us.


APPLICATION.

This Fable is designed to shew us how unreasonable many people are, who
live in continual fears and disquiet about the miserableness of their
condition. There is hardly any state of life great enough to satisfy
the wishes of an ambitious man; and scarcely any so mean, but may
supply the necessities of him that is moderate. There are few beings so
very wretched, that they cannot pick out others in a more deplorable
situation, and with whom they would not change cases. The rich man
envies the poor man’s health, without considering his wants; and the
poor man envies the other’s treasure, without considering his diseases.
The miseries of others should serve to add vigour to our minds, and
teach us to bear up against the load of lighter misfortunes. But what
shall we say to those who have a way of creating themselves panics from
the rustling of the wind, the scratching of a rat or a mouse behind the
hangings, the fluttering of a moth, or the motion of their own shadow
by moon-light! Their whole life is as full of alarms as that of a Hare,
and they never think themselves so easy as when, like the timorous
folks in the Fable, they meet with a set of creatures as fearful as
themselves.






THE MOUNTAINS IN LABOUR.


The Mountains were said to be in labour, and uttered the most dreadful
groans. People came together, far and near, to see what birth would be
produced; and after they had waited a considerable time in expectation,
out crept a Mouse.


APPLICATION.

Projectors of all kinds, who endeavour by artful rumours, large
promises, and vast preparations, to raise the expectations of mankind,
and then by their mean performances disappoint them, have, time out of
mind, been lashed with the recital of this Fable. It should teach us
to suspect those who promise very largely, and to examine cautiously
what grounds they proceed upon, and whether their pretensions are not
intended to render us their tools, or the dupes of their artifices.
It likewise teaches us not to rely implicitly upon those constant
declarations for liberty and the public good, which artful politicians
use as stepping stones to power; but who having raised the people’s
expectations to the highest pitch, and obtained their desire by the
public enthusiasm, then turn their whole art and cunning to embezzling
the public treasure for their own private wicked ends, or to ruin
and enslave their country; or at best but imitate the bad conduct of
those whom they turned out by their clamour, while the sanguine hopes
of all those that wished well to virtue, and flattered themselves
with a reformation of every thing that opposed the well-being of the
community, vanish away in smoke, and are lost in a gloomy uncomfortable
prospect. The Fable likewise intimates, that the uncertain issue of
all human undertakings should induce us not to make pompous boasts of
ourselves, but to guard against promising any thing exceedingly great,
for fear of coming off with a production ridiculously little. If we set
out modestly, and perform more than we engaged to do, we shall find
our fame grow upon us, and every unexpected addition we make to our
plan will raise us more and more in the good opinion of the world; but
if, on the contrary, we make ample professions of the greatness of our
designs, and the excellence of our own abilities, it will too often
happen, that instead of swelling our reputation, we shall only blow the
trumpet to our shame.






THE VAIN JACK-DAW.


A certain Jack-daw was so proud and ambitious, that, not contented
to live within his own sphere, he picked up the feathers which fell
from the Peacocks, stuck them in among his own, and very confidently
introduced himself into an assembly of those beautiful birds. They soon
found him out, stripped him of his borrowed plumes, and falling upon
him with their sharp bills, punished him as his presumption deserved.
Upon this, full of grief and affliction, he returned to his old
companions, and would have lived with them again; but they, knowing his
late life and conversation, industriously avoided him, and refused to
admit him into their company; and one of them, at the same time, gave
him this serious reproof: If, friend, you could have been contented
with our station, and had not disdained the rank in which nature had
placed you, you had not been used so scurvily by those upon whom you
intruded yourself, nor suffered the notorious slight which now we think
ourselves obliged to put upon you.


APPLICATION.

To aim at making a figure by the means of either borrowed wit, or
borrowed money, generally subjects us at last to a ten-fold ridicule.
A wise man, therefore, will take his post quietly, in his own station,
without pretending to fill that of another, and never affect to look
bigger than he really is, by means of a false or borrowed light. It
shews great weakness and vanity in any man to be pleased at making an
appearance above what he really is; but if to enable him to do so with
something of a better grace, he has clandestinely feathered his nest
out of his neighbour’s goods, it is a pity if he should not be found
out, stripped of his plunder, and treated like a felonious rogue into
the bargain.








THE LION AND THE MOUSE.


A Lion having laid down to take his repose under the spreading boughs
of a shady tree, a company of Mice scampered over his back and waked
him. Upon which, starting up, he clapped his paw upon one of them, and
was just going to put it to death, when the little suppliant implored
his mercy, begging him not to stain his noble character with the blood
of so small and insignificant a creature. The Lion, touched with
compassion, instantly released his little trembling captive. Not long
after, traversing the forest in search of his prey, he chanced to run
into the toils of the hunters, and not being able to disengage himself,
he set up a loud roar. The Mouse hearing the voice, and knowing it to
be the Lion’s, immediately repaired to the place, and bade him fear
nothing, for that he was his friend. Instantly he fell to work, and
with his little sharp teeth gnawed asunder the knots and fastenings of
the toils, and set the royal brute at liberty.


APPLICATION.

They who generously shower benefits on their fellow-creatures, seldom
fail of inspiring the great bulk of them with a benevolent regard for
their benefactors, and often receive returns of kindness which they
never expected. Mercy is of all other virtues the most likely to kindle
gratitude in those to whom it is extended, and it is difficult to find
an instance of a conqueror who ever had occasion to repent of his
humanity and clemency. The Fable gives us to understand, that there is
no person in the world so little, but even the greatest may, at some
time or other, stand in need of his assistance; and consequently, it
is good to shew favour, when there is room for it, towards those who
fall into our power. As the lowest people in life may, upon occasion,
be able either to serve or hurt us, it is as much our interest as our
duty to behave with good-nature and lenity towards all with whom we
have any intercourse. A great soul is never so much delighted as when
an opportunity offers of making a return for favours received; and a
sensible man, however exalted his station, will never consider himself
secure from the necessity of accepting a service from the poorest.






THE TORTOISE AND THE EAGLE.


A Tortoise, weary of his condition, by which he was confined to
creep upon the ground, and ambitious to look about him with a larger
prospect, proclaimed that if any bird would take him up into the air,
and shew him the world, he would reward him with the discovery of an
invaluable treasure, which he knew was hidden in a certain place of
the earth. The Eagle accepted the offer, and having performed his
undertaking, gently set the Tortoise again on the ground, and demanded
the reward. The Tortoise was obliged to confess that he could not
fulfil his promise, which he had made only with the view of having his
fancy gratified. The Eagle, stung with resentment at being thus duped,
grasped him again in his talons, and then soaring to a great height,
let him fall, by which he was dashed to pieces.


APPLICATION.

Men of honour are careful not to tarnish their reputations by
falsifying their word, and always consider well how far it may be in
their power to fulfil their promises before they make them. They always
strive to walk on the straight line of rectitude; and should they, in
an unguarded moment, happen to stagger from it, they instantly retrace
their steps, and feel unhappy until they have regained their station.
There is a simplicity in truth and virtue, which requires no artifices,
and never leads us into difficulties, but points out the plain and safe
way. Deceit and cunning, on the contrary, involve those who practise
them in a maze, and they are bewildered in their own falsehoods, from
which no dexterity can extricate them. The brain-racking schemes which
villains practise to delude others, are commonly detected, and end in
the unpitied punishment of themselves; for they seldom discover the
folly of being wicked, until it has betrayed them into their ruin. But
such persons would do well to refresh their memories with the old adage
which says, that “all knaves are fools, but all fools are not knaves.”








THE POLECAT AND THE COCK.


A Polecat, that had long committed depredations on the farm-yard,
having a mind to make a meal of the blood of the Cock, seized him one
morning by surprize, and asked him what he could say for himself why
slaughter should not pass upon him? The Cock replied, that he was
serviceable to mankind by crowing in the morning, and calling them
up to their daily labour. That is true, says the Polecat, and is the
very objection that I have against you, for you make such a shrill
impertinent noise, that people cannot sleep for you. Besides, you are
an incestuous rascal, and make no scruple of lying with your mother
and sisters. Well, says the Cock, this I do not deny; but I do it to
procure eggs and chickens for my master. Ah! villain, says the Polecat,
hold your wicked tongue, such impieties as these declare that you are
no longer fit to live.


APPLICATION.

When a wicked man in power has a mind to glut his appetite in any
respect, innocence or even merit is no protection against him. The
cries of justice and the voice of reason, are of no effect upon a
conscience hardened in iniquity, and a mind versed in a long practice
of wrong and robbery. Remonstrances, however reasonably urged, or
movingly couched, have no more influence upon the hearts of such,
than the gentle evening breeze has upon the oak, when it whispers
among its branches; or the rising surges upon the deaf rock, when they
dash and break upon its sides. Power should never be trusted in the
hands of an impious selfish man, and one that has more regard to the
gratification of his own insatiable desires, than to public peace and
justice; but as a wicked son may succeed to the station of a virtuous
and patriotic father, care should be taken to guard against a surprise,
by a vigilant watchfulness of the encroaching nature of power, even
when in benevolent hands, that those checks may not be undermined which
counteract its abuse in bad ones. Had the poor Cock exerted his usual
vigilance, it would have served him much more effectually than either
his innocence or his eloquence.






THE FOWLER AND THE BLACKBIRD.


A Fowler was busy placing his nets, and putting his tackle in order,
by the side of a coppice, when a Blackbird, who was perched on an
adjacent tree, eyed him with great attention; but being at a loss to
know the use of all this apparatus and preparation, had the curiosity
to ask him what he was doing. I am, says the Fowler, building a fine
city for you birds to live in, and providing it with meat and all
manner of conveniences for you. Having said this, he departed and hid
himself, and the Blackbird, believing his words, came into the nets and
was taken; but when the man ran up to seize his captive, the Bird thus
addressed him: If this be your faith, and these the cities you build,
it will be a great pity if you should ever again persuade any poor
simple bird to try to inhabit them.


APPLICATION.

The fowler’s professions of friendship for the birds, while he aimed
at their destruction, may be paralleled by too many instances in
real life; and however mortifying it may be to reflect upon, yet
so it is, that the designing knave far too often succeeds in his
deep-laid schemes to ensnare, over-reach, and ruin the honest and the
unsuspecting man. Planners and projectors of this character, both of
high and low degree, are suffered to roam at large, and it behoves the
inexperienced to guard against their plots with a watchful eye; for
while they smoothly disclaim taking any mean advantage over those they
are addressing, with their plausible pretensions, their sole study and
aim is to fill their own pockets, and then to hug themselves with the
thoughts of their success, and to laugh at those whom they have duped.
As long as people can be found credulous enough to suffer themselves to
be imposed upon, so long will there arise gentry of this description,
who will live in affluence by taking advantage of their weakness.








THE NURSE AND THE WOLF.


A Nurse, who was endeavouring to quiet a froward child, among other
things threatened to throw it out of doors to the Wolf, if it did not
leave off crying. A Wolf, who chanced to be prowling near the door
just at the time, heard the expression, and believing the woman to be
in earnest, waited a long while about the house, in expectation of
having her words made good. But at last the child, wearied with its own
perverseness, fell asleep, and the Wolf was forced to return back into
the woods, empty and supperless. The Fox meeting him, and surprized to
see him going home so thin and disconsolate, asked him what the matter
was, and how he came to speed no better that night? Ah! do not ask me,
says he, I was so silly as to believe what the Nurse said, and have
been disappointed.


APPLICATION.

Many of the old moralists have interpreted this Fable as a caution
never to trust a woman: a barbarous inference, which neither the
obvious sense of the apologue, nor the disposition of the softer sex
will warrant. For though some women may be fickle and unstable, yet the
generality exceed their calumniators in truth and constancy, and have
more frequently to complain of being the victims, than to be arraigned
as the authors of broken vows. To us this Fable appears to mean little
more than merely to shew how easily inclined we are, in all our various
expectations through life, to delude ourselves into a belief of any
thing which we desire to be true. The lover interprets every smile of
his mistress in his own favour, and is then perhaps neglected. The
beauty believes all mankind are dying for her, and is then deserted by
her train of admirers. The followers of the great reckon a smile or a
nod very auspicious omens, and deceive themselves with groundless hopes
of employment or promotion, in expectation of which, they, like the
Wolf at the Nurse’s door, dangle away the time that might be usefully
employed elsewhere, and at last are obliged to retire disappointed
and hungry, crying out perhaps against the perfidy of those in power,
instead of blaming their own sanguine credulity.






THE HARPER.


A Man who used to play upon the harp, and sing to it, in little
ale-houses, and made a shift in those narrow confined walls to please
the dull sots who heard him, from hence entertained an ambition of
shewing his parts in the public theatre, where he fancied he could not
fail of raising a great reputation and fortune in a very short time. He
was accordingly admitted upon trial; but the spaciousness of the place,
and the throng of the people, so deadened and weakened both his voice
and instrument, that scarcely either of them could be heard, and where
they could, his performance sounded so poor, so low, and wretched, in
the ears of his refined audience, that he was universally hissed off
the stage.


APPLICATION.

When we are commended for our performances by people of much flattery
or little judgment, we should be sure not to value ourselves upon
it; for want of this caution, many a vain unthinking man has at once
exposed himself to the censure of the world. A buffoon, though he would
not be fit to open his mouth in a senate, or upon a subject where sound
sense and a grave and serious behaviour are expected, may be very
agreeable to a company disposed to be mirthful over a glass of wine.
It is not the diverting a little, insignificant, injudicious audience
or society, which can gain us a proper esteem, or insure our success,
in a place which calls for a performance of the first rate. We should
have either allowed abilities to please the most refined tastes, or
judgment enough to know that we want them, and to have a care how we
submit ourselves to the trial. And, if we have a mind to pursue a
just and true ambition, it is not sufficient that we study barely to
please; but it is of the greatest moment whom we please, and in what
respect, otherwise we may not only lose our labour, but make ourselves
ridiculous into the bargain.








THE ANT AND THE FLY.


In a dispute between the Ant and the Fly concerning precedency, the
latter thus boasted: I have, said he, the uppermost seats at church,
and even frequent the altars; I am taster to the gods, and a partaker
of all their sacrifices; I am admitted into the palaces of kings, and
enjoy myself at every entertainment provided for the princes of the
earth, and all this without having occasion to labour. What have you to
boast of, poor sorry drudge, crawling upon the earth, living in caverns
and holes, and with constant exertion gathering up a grain of corn
to support a wretched existence? Indeed! said the Ant, I pretend to
none of these fine things. Visiting the great, and partaking of their
festivals and sacrifices, might be entitled to some consideration, were
you invited; but you are only an impudent intruder in such places. My
time, indeed, is spent differently: I lead a life of industry, which
is crowned with health and vigour, and I am constantly held up as an
example of prudence and foresight. I provide for present comforts
and future wants, and court not the favors, nor dread the frowns, of
any one; while your laziness and vanity make you a beggarly intruder
wherever you hope to get a present supply. You may, perhaps, sip honey
one day, but on the next you batten on carrion; and having propagated
a numerous progeny, equally as noxious and useless as yourself, I then
behold you from my comfortable, warm, well-stored mansion, in the
winter of your days, starving to death with hunger and cold.


APPLICATION.

The worthless part of mankind, who pass through the world without being
of any service in it, and without acquiring the least reputation,
seldom fail of adding empty pride to all their other failings, and
behave with arrogance towards those who contribute to the comforts
and happiness of society. They treat industrious persons as wretched
drudges, appointed to labour for a poor subsistence, while they think
themselves entitled to enjoy all the good things of this life, though
they of all others least deserve them. But the worthy and industrious
will generally find that the pride and extravagance of these idle
flies, bring them at last to shame, if not to want, while their own
honest labours secure a good name, a happy mind, and a sufficiency for
their wants, if not a state of affluence. In short, no one is a better
gentleman than he whose own honest industry supplies him with all
necessaries, and who pretends to no more acquaintance with honour than
never to say or do a mean or an unjust thing.






THE MOUSE AND THE WEASEL.


A thin hungry Mouse, after much pushing and twisting, crept through a
small hole, into a corn basket, where he gorged himself so plentifully,
that on his attempting to retire by the same passage, he found himself
so swelled out, that, with all his endeavours, he could not squeeze
through again. A Weasel, who stood at some distance, and had been
diverting himself with the vain efforts of the little glutton, called
to him sneeringly, Hark ye, Mr Mouse! remember that you were lean and
half-starved when you got in at that small hole; and take my word for
it, you must be as lean and half-starved before you can make your way
out again.


APPLICATION.

That portion of mankind, whose inordinate desires push them on to
stick at nothing in acquiring wealth, are seldom the most happy; for
covetousness, which never produced one noble sentiment, often urges
its votaries to break through the rules of justice, and then deprives
them of the expected fruits of their iniquity. Besides great riches and
care are almost inseparable; and there is often a quiet and content
attending upon people of moderate circumstances, to which the wealthy
man is an utter stranger. It has happened, even to monarchs, that their
inroads on the possessions of others have tended to the detriment of
the aggressor, who has been obliged to resign the rich spoils obtained
by unjustifiable hostilities, and to refund the ill-gotten wealth, with
a very bad grace: a punishment which Providence has wisely annexed to
acts of violence and fraud, as the best security of the possessions
of the just and virtuous, against the attempts of the wicked. Some
men, from creeping in the lowest stations of life, have in process of
time reached the greatest places, and grown so bulky by pursuing their
insatiate appetite for money, that when they would have retired, they
found themselves too opulent and full to get off. There has been no
expedient for them to creep out, till they were squeezed and reduced in
some measure to their primitive littleness. They that fill themselves
with that which is the property of others, should always be so served
before they are suffered to escape.






THE EAGLE AND THE FOX.


An Eagle that had young ones, looking for something to feed them
with, happened to spy a Fox’s Cub that lay basking itself abroad in
the sun: she made a stoop, and trussed it immediately; but before she
had carried it quite off, the old Fox coming home, implored her, with
tears, to spare her Cub, and pity the distress of a poor fond mother,
who would think no affliction so great as that of losing her child.
The Eagle, whose nest was high in an old hollow tree, thought herself
secure from all projects of revenge, and so bore away the Cub to her
young ones, without shewing any regard to the supplications of the Fox.
But that subtle creature, highly incensed at this outrageous barbarity,
ran to an altar, where some country people had been sacrificing a kid
in the open fields, and catching up a fire-brand in her mouth, made
towards the tree where the Eagle’s nest was, with a resolution of
revenge. She had scarcely reached its root, when the Eagle, terrified
with the approaching ruin of herself and family, begged of the Fox to
desist, and, with much submission, returned her the Cub safe and sound.


APPLICATION.

When men in high situations happen to be wicked, how little scruple do
they make of oppressing their poor neighbours! They are perched upon
a lofty station, and, having outgrown all feelings of humanity, are
insensible to the pangs of remorse. The widow’s tears, the orphan’s
cries, and the curses of the miserable, fall by the way, and never
reach their hearts. But let such, in the midst of their flagrant
injustice, remember how easy it is, notwithstanding their superior
distance, for the meanest vassal to take his revenge. The bitterness
of affliction (even where cunning is wanting) may animate the poorest
spirit with desperate resolutions; and when once the fury of revenge
is thoroughly awakened, we know not what she may effect before she
is lulled to rest again. The most powerful tyrants cannot prevent a
resolved assassination: there are a thousand different ways for any
private man to do the business, who is heartily disposed to it, and
willing to satisfy his appetite for revenge, at the expence of his
life. An old woman may clap a fire-brand to the palace of a prince, and
a poor weak fool may destroy the children of the mighty.






THE BELLY AND THE MEMBERS.


In former days, it happened that the Members of the human body,
taking some offence at the conduct of the Belly, resolved no longer
to grant it the usual supplies. The Tongue first, in a seditious
speech, aggravated their grievances; and after highly extolling the
activity and diligence of the Hands and Feet, set forth how hard
and unreasonable it was, that the fruits of their labour should be
squandered away upon the insatiable cravings of a fat and indolent
paunch. In short, it was resolved for the future to strike off his
allowance, and let him shift for himself as well as he could. The Hands
protested they would not lift a Finger to keep him from starving; and
the Teeth refused to chew a single morsel more for his use. In this
distress, the Belly remonstrated with them in vain; for during the
clamour of passion the voice of reason is always disregarded. This
unnatural resolution was kept as long as any thing of that kind can be
kept, which was, until each of the rebel members pined away to the skin
and bone, and could hold out no longer. Then they found there was no
doing without the Belly, and, that idle and insatiable as it seemed, it
contributed as much to the welfare of all the other parts, as they in
their several stations did towards its maintenance.


APPLICATION.

This Fable was spoken by Menenius Agrippa, a Roman consul and general,
when he was deputed by the senate to appease a dangerous tumult and
insurrection of the people. The many wars the Romans were engaged in,
and the frequent supplies they were obliged to raise, had so soured
and inflamed the minds of the populace, that they were resolved to
endure it no longer, and obstinately refused to pay the taxes. It is
easy to discern how the great man applied this Fable: for, if the
branches and members of a community refuse the government that aid
which its necessities require, the whole must perish together. The
rulers of a state, useless or frivolous as they may sometimes seem, are
yet as necessary to be kept up and maintained in a proper and decent
grandeur, as the family of each private person is, in a condition
suitable to itself. Every man’s enjoyment of that little which he gains
by his daily labour, depends upon the government’s being maintained
in a condition to defend and secure him in the unmolested control and
possession of it.






THE FATAL MARRIAGE.


A Mouse being ambitious of marrying into a noble family, paid his
addresses to a young Lioness, and at length succeeded in entering into
a treaty of marriage with her. When the day appointed for the nuptials
arrived, the bridegroom set out in a transport of joy to meet his
beloved bride; and coming up to her, passionately threw himself at
her feet; but she, like a giddy thing as she was, not minding how she
walked, accidentally set her foot upon her little spouse, and crushed
him to death.


APPLICATION.

It is very unsafe for persons of low estate to form connections with
those of a very superior situation. When wealthy persons of mean
extraction and unrefined education, as an equivalent for their money,
demand brides out of the nursery of the peerage, if they should not
be ruined by the giddy extravagance of their high-born wives, their
being despised, or at least treated with neglect, is almost certain.
But indeed, much unhappiness follows the want of a sound judgment in
the choice of a partner for life, whether it be in high or low, rich
or poor. No human contract is of so important, as well as delicate
a nature, as marriage. It is one of the grand epochs in the history
of a man. It is an engagement which should be voluntary, judicious,
and disinterested, and can never be attended with honour, or blessed
with happiness, if it has not its origin in mutual affection. If it
be either unsuitable or compulsory, it produces not only individual
misery, but consequences universally pernicious. Sordid interest and
vile dependence may indeed sometimes act so powerfully, as to set
nature and true convenience aside, so as to make the yoke which is
jointly borne by the improper union of the high and low, or by age
and youth, put on an appearance of regard for each other; but natural
affection must needs be wanting on one side or the other. Nature has,
however, with a strong hand, pointed out the path to be pursued, and a
few prudential rules only are necessary to keep us within it. If a man
is of an unsound constitution, or if he cannot provide for a family,
let him forbear matrimony: it is the duty of every man who marries, to
take a healthy woman for his wife, for the sake of his children, and an
amiable one, for his own comfort. The same precaution ought to be taken
by the fair sex, unless they can make up their minds to become nurses
to tainted worn-out husbands, and their puny nerveless offspring.






THE YOUNG MAN AND THE LION.


An opulent Old Man, who believed in omens and dreams, had an only Son,
of whom he was dotingly fond. One night he dreamt that he saw the Young
Man, while he was eagerly engaged in the chase, seized upon and torn in
pieces by a Lion. This operated upon his fears to such a degree, that
he instantly determined upon breaking off his Son’s strong propensity
to hunting, that he might be kept out of harm’s way. For this purpose,
he spared neither pains nor expence to make home agreeable to him. He
had the rooms decorated with the finest paintings of forest scenery,
and the hunting of wild beasts, with the reality of which the youth had
been so much delighted; but the Young Man, debarred from his favourite
pleasures, considered the palace a prison, and his father as the
keeper. One day, when looking at the pictures, he cast his eye upon
that of a Lion, and, enraged that he was confined for a dream about
such a beast, he struck at the painting with his fist, with all his
might. There happened to be a nail in the wall behind the canvas, which
lacerated the hand terribly. The wound festered, and threw the Young
Man into a fever, of which he died; so that the Father’s dream was
fulfilled by the very step he took to prevent it.


APPLICATION.

Those people who govern their lives by forebodings and dreams, and
signs of ill-luck, are kept in a state of constant anxiety and
uneasiness. Such a disposition is grounded on superstition, which is
the offspring of a narrow mind, and adds greatly to the evils with
which life is sufficiently loaded. Heaven has kindly concealed from
us the knowledge of futurity, and it is therefore foolish for us to
attempt to pry into it, or to disturb our minds with absurd conceptions
of events which are only realised by our ridiculous precautions against
them. How inconsistent is the conduct of people who imagine things to
be predestined, and yet busy themselves in endeavours to prevent their
coming to pass; as if the vain efforts of human power or prudence were
able to counteract the will, or reverse the decrees of the Omnipotent.








THE KITE AND THE PIGEONS.


A Kite who had kept sailing in the air for many days near a dove-house,
and made a stoop at several Pigeons to no purpose, for they were
too nimble for him, at last had recourse to stratagem, and made a
declaration to them, in which he set forth his own just and good
intentions, and that he had nothing more at heart than the defence
and protection of the Pigeons in their ancient rights and liberties,
and how concerned he was at their unjust and unreasonable suspicions
of himself, as if he intended by force of arms to break in upon their
constitution, and erect a tyrannical government over them. To prevent
all which, and thoroughly to quiet their minds, he thought proper
to propose such terms of alliance, as might for ever cement a good
understanding between them; one of which was, that they should accept
of him for their king, and invest him with all kingly privilege and
prerogative over them; in return for which he promised them protection
from all their enemies. The poor simple Pigeons consented: the Kite
took the coronation oath, after a very solemn manner, on his part, and
the Doves the oaths of allegiance and fidelity on theirs. But much time
had not passed over their heads before the good Kite pretended that it
was part of his prerogative to devour a Pigeon whenever he pleased;
and this he was not contented to do himself only, but instructed the
rest of the royal family in the same kingly arts. The Pigeons, reduced
to this miserable condition, said one to the other, Ah! we deserve no
better! Why did we let him come in?


APPLICATION.

What can this Fable be applied to, but the exceeding blindness and
stupidity of that part of mankind, who wantonly and foolishly trust
their native rights of liberty without good security? Who often chuse
for guardians of their lives and fortunes, persons abandoned to the
most unsociable of vices; and seldom have any better excuse for such an
error in politics, than that they were deceived in their expectation,
or never thoroughly knew the manners of their king, till he had got
them entirely in his power. We ought not to incur the possibility of
being deceived in so important a matter as this; an unlimited power
should not be trusted in the hands of any one who is not endowed with a
perfection more than human.






THE SICK KITE.


A Kite who had been sick a long time, beginning to be doubtful of
recovery, begged of his Mother to go to all the churches and religious
houses in the country, to try what prayers and offerings would effect
in his behalf. The old Kite replied, Indeed, my dear son, I would
willingly undertake any thing to save your life; but I have great
reason to despair of doing you any service in the way you propose: for,
with what face can I ask any thing of the Gods, in favour of one whose
whole life has been a continued scene of rapine and injustice, and who
has not scrupled, upon occasion, to rob even their altars?


APPLICATION.

The rehearsal of this Fable almost unavoidably draws our attention
to that very serious and important point, the consideration of a
death-bed repentance, the sincerity of which we may justly suspect in
one whose whole life has been spent in acts of wickedness and impiety.
To expose the absurdity of relying upon such a weak foundation, we need
only ask the same question with the Kite in the Fable: how can he,
who has offended the Gods all his life-time by acts of dishonour and
injustice, expect that they will be pleased with him at last, for no
other reason but because he fears he shall not be able to offend them
any longer? Since the summons to “pass that bourn whence no traveller
returns,” must one day come, we ought always to be prepared to meet it.
But when the whole life has been wasted, without communion with, or
totally estranged from that Almighty Being, by whose fiat it was called
into existence, then indeed the polluted soul must be distracted with
the agonizing thoughts of appearing before Him, who created it for a
very different purpose. Nothing but the consciousness of having led a
virtuous life, can in the awful moment, disarm death of his terrors,
and fortify the mind with cheering hopes and resignation. But this is a
subject of the utmost importance, and the due enforcing of it is one of
the most solemn duties of the pulpit.








THE FOX AND THE LION.


The first time the Fox saw the Lion, he fell down at his feet, and was
ready to die with fear. The second time he took courage, and could even
bear to look upon him. The third time he had the impudence to come up
to him, to salute him, and to enter into familiar conversation with him.


APPLICATION.

From this Fable we may observe the two extremes in which we may
fail as to a proper behaviour towards our superiors. The one is a
bashfulness, proceeding either from a vicious guilty mind, or a
timorous rusticity; the other an over-bearing impudence, which assumes
more than becomes it, and so renders the person insufferable to the
conversation of well-bred reasonable people. But there is a difference
between the bashfulness which arises from a want of education, and the
shame-facedness that accompanies conscious guilt: the first by time and
a nearer acquaintance, may be ripened into a proper liberal behaviour;
the other no sooner finds an easy practicable access, but it throws off
all manner of reverence, grows every day more and more familiar, and
branches out at last into the utmost indecency and irregularity. Indeed
there are many occasions which may happen to cast an awe, or even a
terror, upon our minds at first view, without any just or reasonable
grounds; but upon a little recollection, or a nearer insight, we
recover ourselves, and can appear indifferent and unconcerned, where
before we were ready to sink under a load of diffidence and fear. We
should upon such occasions use our endeavours to regain a due degree
of steadiness and resolution; but at the same time we must have a care
that our efforts in that respect do not force the balance too much, and
make it rise to an unbecoming freedom, and an offensive familiarity.








THE DOG AND THE WOLF.


A Wolf in quest of prey, happened to fall in with a well-fed Mastiff.
Ah, Tray, said he, one does not need to ask how you do, you look so
plump and hearty. I wish I were as well provided for; but my gaunt
looks shew that I fare very differently, although I dare say I venture
my life ten times more than you do, in searching for a precarious
subsistence, amidst woods and wilds, exposed to rain, and frost, and
snow. If you will follow me, replies the Dog, and do as I do, I have no
doubt you will change for the better, and soon be in as good plight as
I am. The Wolf eagerly requested to be informed what would be required
of him. Very little, replied the Mastiff; only drive away beggars,
guard the master’s house, caress him, and be submissive to his family,
and you will be well fed and warmly lodged. To these conditions the
Wolf had no objections; but as they were jogging along, he observed
the hair worn off around the Dog’s neck, and enquired the cause. O
nothing, answered he, or a mere trifle; perhaps the collar, to which
my chain is fastened, has left a mark. Chain! replied the Wolf, with
some surprize; so then you are not permitted to go where and when
you please? Not always, said Tray; but what does that signify? It
signifies so much, rejoined the Wolf, that I am resolved to partake of
no sumptuous fare with a chain about my neck; for half a meal, with
liberty, is preferable to a full one without it.


APPLICATION.

True greatness of soul will never give up liberty for any consideration
whatever; for what are riches, grandeur, titles, or any other worldly
good, if they are holden by so precarious a tenure as the arbitrary
will of a tyrant! A mere competency, with liberty, is preferable to
servitude amidst the greatest affluence; and even the lowest condition
in life, with freedom, is better than the most exalted station without
it. But liberty in a state of society does not consist in doing
whatsoever we please; but only permits those actions by which we do
no injustice to our neighbour, or to the community. The well-being of
society requires the efforts of all, from the highest to the lowest,
to preserve and support it; and since it appears to be the will of
Omnipotence, that mankind should live in this state of social union
(which does not admit of the unbridled freedom of the savage state) a
certain portion of individual liberty must be given up for the good of
the whole; but the sacrifice should be bounded by the common good: all
beyond approaches towards slavery, and degrades the people who submit
to it.






THE FLYING FISH AND THE DOLPHIN.


The Flying Fish, to avoid its enemies, leaves the water, takes wing,
and mounts up into the air. The Dolphin is one of the most constant
of these enemies; and its velocity through the liquid element, it is
said, surpasses that of every living creature, insomuch that as it
darts along, the brilliancy and changeableness of its colours, which
cannot be described, appear like the flash of a meteor. A Flying Fish
being pursued by a Dolphin, in his eagerness to escape, took too long
a flight, and his wings becoming dry, he fell upon a rock, where his
death was inevitable. The Dolphin, in the keenness of his pursuit, ran
himself on shore at the foot of the rock, and was left by the wave,
gasping in the same condition as the other. Well, says the Flying Fish,
I must die it is certain; but it is some consolation to behold my
merciless enemy involved in the same fate.


APPLICATION.

When brought low by a cruel and insolent oppressor, there is no torture
we feel more poignantly, than to see him triumphantly exulting in our
downfal; and the opposite extreme must take place in our minds, on
seeing our enemy over-shoot his mark, and in his turn brought down
to the same level of distress with ourselves. The temper that is not
touched with feelings of this kind, must be of a highly philosophical
cast indeed. The great and powerful, for the sake of their own peace
of mind, should not unfeelingly persecute their inferiors; for nothing
is more sweet to some tempers, and scarcely any thing more easy to
compass, than revenge.

[Illustration: _It is not so ugly as a purse-proud, ignorant, wicked
man._]






THE LION AND THE FROG.


The Lion hearing an odd kind of hollow voice, and seeing nobody,
started up: he listened again, and hearing the noise repeated, he
trembled and quaked for fear. At last, seeing a Frog crawl out of the
lake, and finding that the noise he had heard was nothing but the
croaking of that little creature, he went up to it with great anger;
but checking himself, turned away from it, ashamed of his own timidity.


APPLICATION.

The early prejudices of a wrong education can only be eradicated from
the strongest minds. The weak retain them through life. This Fable is
a pretty image of the vain fears and empty terrors, with which our
weak misguided nature is so apt to be alarmed and disturbed. If we
hear but ever so little noise which we are not able to account for,
immediately, nay, often before we give ourselves time to consider
about it, we are struck with fear, and labour under a most unmanly and
unreasonable trepidation; more especially if the alarm happens when we
are alone, and in the dark. These fears are ingrafted into our minds
very early, and therefore it is the more difficult, even when we are
grown up, and ashamed of them, to root them out of our nature. They
are chiefly the offspring of the nursery, and originate in the many
terrific tales, and lying stories, of those who have the management
there; and though every pains be afterwards taken to free the mind from
the impression of such groundless fears, the weaker part of mankind are
still apt to be terrified at the empty phantoms of ghosts, spectres,
apparitions, and hobgoblins. But whatever effect such phantasies
may have upon the guilty mind, innocence has nothing to dread from
supernatural causes. Fear is however a natural passion, and its use
is to put us upon our guard against danger, by alarming the spirits;
but it, like all our other passions, should be kept in a state of
subjection: for though they are all good and useful servants, yet if
once they get the better of our reason, they prove the most domineering
tyrants imaginable; nor do any of them treat us in so abject and
slavish a manner as fear: it unnerves and enfeebles our limbs, while
it fetters our understandings; and at the same time that it represents
a danger near at hand, disarms and makes us incapable of defending
ourselves from it. But we ought to call forth a sense of honour and
shame, to correct such weaknesses; and for this purpose it will be
useful to remember the Fable of the Lion and the Frog.






THE KID AND THE WOLF.


A Kid being mounted upon the roof of a high shed, and seeing a Wolf
below, took the opportunity of affronting him with the foulest
reproaches: upon which the Wolf looking up, replied, Do not value
yourself, vain creature, upon thinking you mortify me, for I look upon
this ill-language not as coming from you, but from the place which
protects you.


APPLICATION.

Place a coward out of the reach of danger, and then no man can put on
an appearance of greater courage. In his castle he makes a great deal
more bluster and threatening than a man of spirit and honour would
do, if placed in the same situation. A similar kind of overbearing
behaviour too often shews itself in the upstart worthless placeman,
who taking advantage of his situation, which protects him, and knowing
that he is out of the reach of our resentment, exhibits all the
“insolence of office:” but such should be put in mind, that a saucy
deportment is no sign of either courage, good sense, or good manners,
and that a gentleman and a man of spirit will use no ill or unbecoming
language to any person, however low in station.








THE COUNTRY AND THE CITY MOUSE.


A plain Country Mouse was one day unexpectedly visited at his hole,
by a fine Mouse of the town, who had formerly been his play-fellow.
The honest rustic, pleased with the honour, resolved to entertain his
friend as sumptuously as possible. He set before him a reserve of
delicate grey pease and bacon, a dish of fine oatmeal, some parings
of new cheese, and to crown all with a dessert, a remnant of a
charming mellow apple. When the repast was nearly finished, the spark
of the town, taking breath, said, Old Crony, give me leave to be a
little free with you; how can you bear to live in this melancholy
hole here, with nothing but woods, and meadows, and mountains, and
rivulets about you? Do you not prefer the conversation of the world
to the chirping of birds, and the splendour of the court, to the rude
aspect of a wild like this? With many flowery arguments, he at last
prevailed upon his country friend to accompany him to town, and about
midnight they safely entered a certain great house, where there had
been an entertainment the day before. Here it was the courtier’s turn
to entertain, and placing his guest on a rich Persian carpet, they
both began to regale most deliciously, when on a sudden the noise of
somebody opening the door, made them scuttle in confusion about the
dining-room. The rustic in particular was ready to die with fear at the
many hair-breadth escapes which followed. At last, recovering himself,
Well, says he, if this be your town-life, much good may it do you. Give
me my poor quiet hole again, with my homely, but comfortable grey pease.


APPLICATION.

A moderate fortune, with a quiet retirement in the country, is
preferable to the greatest affluence, attended with the care and the
perplexity of business. How often are we deceived by the specious
shows of splendour and magnificence; and what a poor exchange does he
make, who gives up ease and content in an humble situation, to engage
in difficulties, and encounter perils in affluence and luxury! The
ploughman in the field, who labours for his daily pittance, earns his
bread with less uneasiness and fatigue, than the man who haunts levees
to obtain wealth and preferment. Riches, properly used, are indeed
very conducive to ease and happiness; but if we leave any comfortable
situation to procure them, or abuse the possession of them by riot and
intemperance, we resign the end for the means, mistake the shadow for
the substance, and convert the instruments of good fortune into the
engines of anxiety and solicitude.






THE ONE-EYED DOE.


A Doe that had lost an eye, used to graze near the sea; and that she
might be the more secure from harm, she kept her blind side towards
the water, from whence she had no apprehension of danger, and with
the other surveyed the country as she fed. By this vigilance and
precaution, she thought herself in the utmost security; but a sly
fellow, with two poaching companions, who had watched her several days
to no purpose, at last took a boat, and came gently down upon her, and
shot her. The Doe, in the agonies of death, breathed out this doleful
complaint: O hard fate, that I should receive my death’s wound from
the side whence I expected no ill, and be safe in that quarter where I
looked for the most danger.


APPLICATION.

We are liable to many misfortunes that no care or foresight can
prevent; but we ought to provide in the best way we can against them,
and leave the rest to Providence. The wisest of men have their foibles
or blind sides, and have their enemies too, who watch to take advantage
of their weaknesses. It behoves us therefore to look to ourselves
on the blind side, as the part that lies most exposed to an attack.
Vigilance and caution are commonly our best preservatives from evil,
and security is often a fatal enemy, when we cherish it so as to lull
all our apprehensions to rest. We should not however encourage in
ourselves the slavish principle of fear, nor make ourselves miserable
on account of latent evils, which it is not in our power to prevent.
The ways and workings of Providence are inscrutable; and it is not in
the power of human prudence to obviate all the accidents of life.








THE TREES AND THE WOODMAN.


A Countryman being in want of a handle for his hatchet, entered a wood
and looked among the branches for one that would suit his purpose. The
Trees, with a curiosity natural to some other creatures, asked him what
he was seeking? He replied that he only wanted a piece of wood to make
a handle to his axe, and begged they would be so good as to permit him
to serve himself. Since that is all, said the Trees, help yourself,
and welcome. He immediately availed himself of the permission, and had
no sooner fitted up his instrument, than he began pell-mell to cut and
hack about him, felling the noblest trees in all the forest, without
distinction. The Oak is said to have spoke thus to the Beech, in a low
whisper: Brother, we must take all this for our easy credulity, and
imprudent generosity.


APPLICATION.

One would imagine that the natural principle of self-preservation
implanted in us, would make it unnecessary to caution any one not to
furnish an enemy with arms against himself. Yet daily experience shews
us that such instances of imprudence are not uncommon. In this life we
are liable to be surrounded with calamities and distresses: we should
therefore be cautious of adding to our misfortunes, by our own want
of caution, and of putting power into the hands of those enemies,
which our merit or our affluence may tempt to rise up against us. Any
person in a community, by what name or title soever distinguished,
who affects a power which may possibly hurt a people, is their enemy,
and therefore they ought not to trust him: for though he were ever
so fully determined not to abuse such a power, yet he is so far a
bad man, as he disturbs a nation’s quiet, and makes them jealous and
uneasy, by desiring to have it, or even retaining it, when it may prove
mischievous. If we consult history, we shall find that the thing called
prerogative, has been claimed and contended for chiefly by those who
never intended to make a good use of it; and as readily resigned by
wise and just princes, who had the true interest of their people at
heart. How like senseless stocks do they act, who, by complimenting
some capricious mortal, from time to time, with scraps of prerogative,
at last put it out of their power to maintain their just and natural
liberty!






THE EAGLE AND THE CROW.


An Eagle flew down from the top of a high rock, and making a stoop at
a Lamb, seized it with her strong talons, and bore aloft her bleating
prize to her young. A Crow observing what passed, was ambitious of
performing the same exploit, and darted down upon a Ram; but instead of
being able to carry it up into the air, she found she had got her claws
entangled in its fleece, and could neither move herself nor her fancied
prize. Thus fixed, she was soon taken by the Shepherd, and given away
to some boys, who eagerly enquired what bird it was? An hour ago, said
he, she fancied herself an Eagle; however I suppose she is by this time
convinced that she is but a Crow.


APPLICATION.

It is impossible for any man to take a true measure of the abilities
of another, without an exact knowledge and true judgment of his own; a
false estimate of which always exposes him to ridicule, and sometimes
to danger. Every man ought therefore to examine the strength of his own
mind with attention and impartiality, and not fondly to flatter himself
that he can by an awkward and ill-judged emulation soar to the height
which has been attained by men endowed by nature with great abilities
and original talents, matured by industry. We can no more adopt the
genius of another man, than we can assume his shape and person. The
bright original in every department of the arts and sciences will be
valued and esteemed, whilst his puny imitators will be treated with
neglect, or be despised. Almost every man has something original in
himself, which, if duly cultivated, might perhaps procure him respect
and applause, and it is creditable for him to endeavour justly to
obtain them.








THE HORSE AND THE STAG.


In ancient times, when the Horse and the Deer ranged the forest with
uncontrolled freedom, it happened that contentions arose between them
about grazing in particular meadows. These disputes ended in a conflict
between them, in which the Deer proved victorious, and with his sharp
horns drove the Horse from the pasture. Full of disappointment and
chagrin, the Horse applied to the Man, and craved his assistance, in
order to re-establish him in the possession of his rights. The request
was granted, on condition that he would suffer himself to be bridled,
saddled, and mounted by his new ally, with whose assistance he entirely
defeated his enemy; but the poor Horse was mightily disappointed when,
upon returning thanks to the Man, and desiring to be dismissed, he
received this answer: No, I never knew before how useful a drudge you
were; now I have found what you are good for, you may be assured I will
keep you to it.


APPLICATION.

Victories may be purchased at too dear a rate, if we solicit the
assistance of allies capable of becoming our most formidable enemies,
and it will be vain to flatter ourselves, that the yoke of slavery,
if we once willingly suffer it to be laid upon our shoulders, can be
easily shaken off, when the ends for which we bore it are accomplished.
The Fable is intended to caution us against consenting to any thing
that might prejudice public liberty, as well as to keep us upon our
guard in the preservation of that which is of a private nature. This
is the use and interpretation given of it by Horace, one of the best
and most polite philosophers that ever wrote. After reciting the Fable,
he applies it thus: This, says he, is the case of him, who, dreading
poverty, parts with that invaluable jewel, liberty; like a wretch as he
is, he will always be subject to a tyrant of some sort or another, and
be a slave for ever, because his avaricious spirit knew not how to be
contented with that moderate competency, which he might have possessed
independent of all the world.








THE MILLER, HIS SON, AND THEIR ASS.


A Miller and his Son were taking their Ass to market to sell him, and
that he might get thither in good condition, they drove him gently
before them. They had not proceeded far before they met a company of
travellers: Sure, say they, you are mighty careful of your Ass; one
of you might as well get up and ride, as suffer him to walk on at his
ease, while you trudge after on foot. In compliance with this advice,
the Old Man set his Son upon the beast. And now, they had scarcely
advanced a quarter of a mile further, before they met another company.
You idle young rogue, said one, why dont you get down, and let your
poor father ride? Upon this, the Old Man made his Son dismount, and got
up himself. While they were marching in this manner, a third company
began to insult the father. You hard-hearted wretch, say they, how can
you suffer that poor lad to wade through the dirt, while you, like an
alderman, ride at your ease? The good-natured Miller stood corrected,
and immediately took his Son up behind him. And now the next man
they met exclaimed, with more vehemence and indignation than all the
rest, Was there ever such a couple of lazy loobies! to overload in so
unconscionable a manner, a poor dumb creature, who is far less able
to carry you, than you are to carry him! The complying Old Man would
have been half inclined to make the trial, had not experience by this
time sufficiently convinced him, that there cannot be a more fruitless
attempt, than to endeavour to please all mankind.


APPLICATION.

It is better to pursue the dictates of one’s own reason, than attempt
to please every body; for to do this is next to impossible. Therefore
we ought to decide according to the best of our judgment, and correct
our mistakes from our own experience. Wise men are instructed by
reason; men of less understanding by experience; the most ignorant by
necessity; and beasts by instinct. When a man so neglects himself,
as not to make a just use of his reason and his mental powers, in
combating with prejudice and folly, as well as the caprice of others,
he will ever be led on in a maze of error, wavering and embarrassed
about pursuing this or that path, until between them he is lost in a
labyrinth, from which he will never be able to extricate himself as
long as he lives.






THE ANT AND THE GRASSHOPPER.


A commonwealth of Ants, having, after a busy summer, provided every
thing for their wants in the winter, were about shutting themselves up
for that dreary season, when a Grasshopper in great distress, and in
dread of perishing with cold and hunger, approached their avenues, and
with great humility begged they would relieve his wants, and permit
him to take shelter in any corner of their comfortable mansion. One of
the Ants asked him how he had disposed of his time in summer, that he
had not taken pains and laid in a stock, as they had done? Alas! my
friends, says he, I passed away the time merrily and pleasantly, in
drinking, singing, and dancing, and never once thought of winter. If
that be the case, replied the Ant, all I have to say is this: that they
who drink, sing, and dance in the summer, run a great risk of starving
in the winter.


APPLICATION.

As summer is the season in which the industrious laborious husbandman
lays up his supplies for the winter, so youth and manhood are the
times of life which we should employ in laying in such a stock as may
suffice for helpless old age; yet there are many whom we call rational
creatures, who squander away in a profuse prodigality, whatever they
get in their younger days, as if the infirmity of age would require no
supplies to support it, or at least would find them administered to it
in some miraculous way. From this Fable we learn this admirable lesson,
never to lose the present opportunity of fairly and honestly providing
against the future evils and accidents of life; and while health and
the vigour of our faculties remain firm and entire, to lay them out
to the best advantage; so that when age and infirmities despoil us of
our strength and abilities, we may not have to bewail that we have
neglected to provide for the wants of our latter days: for it should
always be remembered, that “a youth of revels breeds an age of care,”
and that temperance in youth lays the foundation of health and comfort
for old age.








THE HORSE AND THE LION.


An old Lion, finding that many of the beasts had become too nimble
for him, and that he could not come at his prey so readily as before,
craftily gave out that he had long studied physic and surgery in
foreign countries, and that he could cure every kind of disorder
to which the beasts were liable. These professions having been
spread abroad, he hoped to get many of the animals to come within
his clutches. The Horse seeing through the whole of the scheme, was
resolved to be even with him; and so humouring the thing as if he
suspected nothing, he feigned himself to be in great pain from a wound
in his foot, and limping up to the Lion, he begged he would examine the
part and administer relief. The Lion, though intent only upon making
a good meal of horse-flesh, begged the Horse to hold up his foot that
he might see it: this was no sooner done, than the Horse gave him so
violent a blow on the nose, as quite stunned him, and scampered off,
neighing at the success of a trick, which had defeated the purpose of
one who intended to have tricked him out of his life.


APPLICATION.

We ought never to put trust in the fair words and pretensions of those
who have both an interest and inclination to ruin us; and where we find
foul play thus intended against us, it is not in the nature of things
to expect that we should not, if we can, turn the tables upon the
plotters. Treachery has something so wicked and worthy of punishment in
its nature, that it deserves to meet with a return of its own kind. An
open revenge is too liberal for it, and nothing matches it but itself.
Though a man of sense and honour will always view tricking and fraud
of all kinds as mean and beneath him, and will despise setting such an
example, yet it cannot be inconsistent with virtue to counteract the
schemes of those who are taking all manner of undue advantages, and
hatching wicked plots to undermine us.








THE FOX IN THE WELL.


A Fox having fallen into a well, made a shift, by sticking his claws
into the sides, to keep his head above water. Soon after, a Wolf came
and peeped over the brink, to whom the Fox applied, and very earnestly
implored his assistance to help him out, or he should be lost. Ah! poor
Reynard, says he, I pity your misfortune; poor creature, I am sorry for
you with all my heart: how did you happen to slip into this well? pray
how long have you been in this melancholy situation? Nay, I prithee
friend, replies the Fox, if you wish me well, do not stand pitying
me, but lend me some succour as soon as you can; for pity is but cold
comfort when one is up to the chin in water, and within a hair’s
breadth of starving or drowning.

APPLICATION.

If we would really manifest our sorrow for the sufferings of another,
let our pity be shewn by our friendly endeavours to relieve him; for
indeed pity of itself is but poor comfort at any time, unless it
produces something more substantial. If we cannot do this, let us not
offend the sensibility, and add to the anguish of a delicate mind, by
empty professions and unmeaning compassion. For, to stand bemoaning
the misfortunes of our friends, without offering some expedient to
alleviate them, is only echoing their grief, and putting them in mind
that they are miserable. He is truly my friend, who with a ready
presence of mind supports me; not he who merely condoles with me upon
my ill success, and expresses his sorrow for my mishap.








THE GARDENER AND HIS DOG.


A Gardener’s Dog happened by some mischance to fall into the well: his
Master ran immediately to his assistance; but when helping him out, the
surly brute bit his hand. The Gardener took this ungrateful treatment
so ill, that he shook him off, and left him to shift for himself. Thou
wicked wretch! said he, to injure the hand that was stretched forth to
save thy life! The hand of thy Master, who has hitherto fed and taken
care of thee! Die there as thou deservest; for so base and unnatural a
creature is not fit to live.


APPLICATION.

When a man has suffered his mind to become so debased as to be capable
to doing injuries to him who has showered benefits on his head, he can
scarcely be treated with too much severity. He deserves at least to
be scouted as an outcast to society. All the favours that are bestowed
upon men of this worthless disposition, are thrown away; for the envy
and malevolence of the ingrate, work him up into a hatred of his
benefactor. Generous men should therefore use a just circumspection in
the choice of the objects of their benevolence, before they give way
to the feelings of the heart, or waste its bountiful overflowings upon
those who, instead of making a grateful return, will bite them like a
drowning but spiteful dog. The Fable is also intended as an admonition
to servants, who owe an especial duty to their masters; whose kindness
should be met by their faithful exertions to serve them; and whose
interest they ever ought to make their own.








THE DEER AND THE LION.


A Deer, terrified by the cry of the Hunters, instead of trusting to
his fleetness, made towards a cave which he chanced to espy, and in
which he hoped to conceal himself until they were passed by; but he
had scarcely reached the entrance before he was seized by a Lion who
lay crouching there, ready to spring upon his prey, and who instantly
killed and tore him to pieces. In the last agonies of death, he thus
gave vent to his feelings: Ah, me! said he, unhappy creature that I am.
I hoped in this cave to escape the pursuit of men; but have fallen into
the jaws of the most cruel and rapacious of wild beasts.


APPLICATION.

This Fable points out the dangers to which we expose ourselves, when,
for want of presence of mind, we suffer ourselves to be guided by our
unreasoning fears, which no sooner shew us an evil, than they throw
us into the utmost confusion in our manner of escaping, and prevent
us from discerning the safe path by which we ought to avoid it. Thus,
in a rash endeavour to shun a less danger, we oftentimes blindly
run headlong into a greater. The fate of the Deer should warn us to
consider well what may be the ultimate consequences, before we take any
important step; for many paths which appear smooth and pleasant at a
distance, are found to be rough and dangerous, when we come to tread
them; and many a plausible scheme, which promises us ease and safety,
is no better than a tempting bower, with a Lion crouching among its
foliage, ready to spring upon and devour us.








THE PLOUGHMAN AND FORTUNE.


As a Ploughman was turning up the soil, his plough uncovered a treasure
which had been hidden there. Transported with joy, he seized upon it,
and fervently began to thank the ground for being so liberal to him.
Fortune passing by, observed what he was about, and could not forbear
shewing her resentment at it. You stupid creature, said she, to lie
thus thanking the ground, and take no notice of me! If you had lost
such a treasure, instead of finding one, I should have been the first
you would have laid the blame upon.


APPLICATION.

How often do we ascribe our success or misfortunes to wrong causes!
Vanity sometimes leads us to consider our prosperity as the natural
result of our own sagacity, and inattention sometimes induces us to
make acknowledgments to wrong persons. But if we would have our praises
valued, we should be cautious to direct them properly. Our thanks are
an indirect affront to those who receive them without deserving them;
and at the same time an act of open ingratitude to those who merit them
without receiving them. In prosperity, as well as in adversity, let us
not forget the power and goodness of Heaven; and if we implore the aid
of the Almighty in our distress, we should not neglect to send up our
acknowledgments of his goodness with the voice of gratitude.








THE APE AND THE FOX.


An Ape meeting with a Fox, humbly requested he would be so good as to
give him some of the superfluous hair from his bushy tail, to make
into a covering for his bare posteriors, which were exposed to all the
inclemency of the weather; and he endeavoured to further his suit by
observing to Reynard, that he had far more than he had any occasion
for, and a great part even dragged along in the dirt. The Fox answered,
that as to his having too much, it was more than he knew; but be it as
it would, he had rather sweep the ground with his tail as long as he
lived, than part with the least bit of it for a covering to the filthy
posteriors of an Ape.


APPLICATION.

Riches, in the hands of a wise and generous man, are a blessing to the
community in which he lives: they are like the light and the rain, and
diffuse a good all around them. But wealth, when it falls to the lot of
those who want benevolence and humanity, serves only as an instrument
of mischief, or at best produces no advantage to the rest of mankind.
The good man considers himself as a kind of steward to those from whom
fortune has withheld her smiles, and thus shews his gratitude to Heaven
for the abundance which has been showered down upon him. He directs the
superfluous part of his wealth at least, to the necessities of such of
his fellow-creatures as are worthy of it, and this he would do from
feeling, though there were no religion which enjoined it. But selfish
avaricious persons, who are generally knaves, how much soever they may
have, will never think they have enough, much less be induced, by any
consideration of virtue or religion, to part with any portion for the
purposes of charity and beneficence. If the riches and power of the
world were to be always in the hands of the virtuous part of mankind,
it would seem, according to our human conceptions, that they would
produce more good than in those of the vile and grovelling mortals,
who often possess them. Without any merit, these move apparently in
a sphere of ease and splendour, while good sense and honesty have to
struggle in adversity, or walk in the dirt. But the all-wise Disposer
of Events does certainly permit this order of things for just, good,
and wise purposes, though our shallow understandings are not able to
fathom them.






THE THIEF AND THE BOY.


An arch mischievous Boy, sitting by the side of a well, observed a
noted Thief coming towards him. The little dissembler, wiping his
eyes, affected to be in great distress. The Thief asking him what was
the matter? ah! says the Boy, I shall be severely flogged, for in
attempting to get some water, I have dropped the silver tankard into
the well. Upon this the Thief, eager for a prize, stripped off his
cloaths, and went down to the bottom to search for it; where having
groped about to no purpose, he came up again, but found neither the Boy
nor the cloaths, the little wag having run off with and hidden them,
and left the Thief to look for the tankard at his leisure.


APPLICATION.

Nothing gives more entertainment to honest men than to see rogues
and sharpers tricked and punished in the pursuit of their schemes of
villainy, by making their own contrivances instrumental in bringing
down their wickedness upon their own heads. In these instances,
Justice seems as it were to be acting in person, and saves the trouble
of publicly enforcing punishment by the penal laws; but indeed vice
carries with it its own punishment, and the misery attendant upon it in
this world, seems always pretty exactly balanced to its various degrees
of enormity. The abandoned man drags on a contemptible or infamous
life, with a constantly deadened or disturbed conscience, and amidst
associates like himself, where he can never hope to meet with either
friendship or fidelity.








THE FOX AND THE SICK LION.


It was reported that the Lion was sick, and the beasts were given to
understand that they could not make their court better than by going to
visit him. Upon this they generally went; but it was particularly taken
notice of, that the Fox was not one of the number. The Lion therefore
dispatched one of his Jackalls to enquire why he had so little charity
and respect as never to come near him, at a time when he lay so
dangerously ill, and every body else had been to see him? Why, replies
the Fox, pray present my duty to his majesty, and tell him that I have
the same respect for him as ever, and have been coming several times,
but was fearful of being troublesome, as I have observed, from the
prints of their footsteps, that great numbers have gone into the royal
den; but I have not seen a single trace of their coming out again.


APPLICATION.

He that embarks implicitly in any scheme, may be mistaken,
notwithstanding the number who keep him company; but he that keeps out
till he sees reason to enter, acts upon true maxims of policy; and it
is the quintessence of prudence not to be too easy of belief: for a
rash and hasty credulity has been the ruin of many. Men who habituate
themselves to think, will profit by the experience of others, as well
as their own: but commonly the multitude do not reason, but stupidly
follow each other step by step; not moving out of the sphere in which
chance has placed them: and the notions or prejudices they may have
imbibed in youth, remain with them to the last. There is no opinion,
however impious or absurd, that has not its advocates in some quarter
of the world. Whoever, therefore, takes up his creed upon trust, and
grounds his principles on no better reason than his being a native or
inhabitant of the regions wherein they prevail, becomes a disciple of
Mahomet in Turkey, and of Confucius in China; a Jew, or a Pagan, as the
accident of birth decides.








THE SUN AND THE WIND.


A dispute arose between the North Wind and the Sun, about the
superiority of their power, and they agreed to determine matters by
trying which of them could first compel a Traveller to throw off his
cloak. The North Wind began, and blew a very cold blast, accompanied
by a sharp driving shower; but this, and whatever else he could do,
instead of making the Man quit his cloak, induced him to gird it about
him more closely. Next came the Sun, who, breaking out from a cloud,
drove away the cold vapours, and darted his warm sultry beams upon the
weather-beaten Traveller. The Man growing faint with the heat, first
threw off his heavy cloak, and then flew for protection to the shade of
a neighbouring grove.


APPLICATION.

There is something in the temper of man so averse to severe and
boisterous treatment, that he who endeavours to carry his point in that
way, instead of prevailing, generally leaves the mind of him whom he
has thus attempted to subdue, in a more confirmed and obstinate state.
Bitter words and hard usage freeze the heart into an obduracy, which
mild, persuasive, and gentle language only can dissolve. Persecution
has always fixed those opinions which it was intended to dispel; and
the quick growth of christianity in early times, is attributed in a
great measure to the barbarous reception which its first teachers
met with in the Pagan world; and since that time the different modes
of faith which have grown out of christianity itself, have been each
established by the same kind of intolerant spirit. To reflect upon
these things, furnishes matter of wonder and regret, for the benevolent
Author of the christian religion taught neither intolerance nor
persecution. The doctrines he laid down are plain, pure, and simple.
They teach mercy to the contrite, aid to the humble, and eternal
happiness to the good. In short, persecution is the scandal of all
religion, and like the north wind in the Fable, only tends to make a
man wrap his notions more closely about him.








THE HORSE AND THE ASS.


The Horse, adorned with his great war-saddle, and champing his foaming
bridle, came thundering along the high-way, and made the mountains echo
with his neighing. He had not gone far before he overtook an Ass, who
was labouring under a heavy burthen, and moving slowly on in the same
track. In an imperious tone he threatened to trample him in the dirt,
if he did not get out of the way. The poor Ass, not daring to dispute,
quietly got aside as fast as he could, and let him go by. Not long
after this, the same Horse, in an engagement, happened to be shot in
the eye, which made him unfit for show, or any military business, so he
was stripped of his ornaments, and sold to a carrier. The Ass meeting
him in this forlorn condition, thought that now it was his time to
retort: Hey-day, friend, says he, is it you! Well, I always believed
that pride of your’s would one day have a fall.


APPLICATION.

It is an affectation of appearing considerable, that puts men upon
being proud and insolent; but this very affectation infallibly makes
them appear little and despicable in the eyes of discerning people.
Did the proud man but rightly consider what kind of ingredients
pride is composed of and fed with, and the unstable foundation, and
the tottering pinnacle upon which it stands, he would blush at the
thoughts of it, and cease to be puffed up by the little supernumerary
advantages, whether of birth, fortune, or title, which he may enjoy
above his neighbours. These might indeed be a blessing to him, and
to the community in which he lives, if wisely used; but if guided by
pride, and consequently by want of sense, they will prove only a curse;
and the reverence and respect which he looks for, will not be paid with
sincerity, nor does he deserve it; and should the tide of misfortune
set in against him, instead of friendship and commiseration, he will
meet with nothing but contempt, and that with much more justice than
ever he himself expressed it towards others. The vain proud man ought
to be put in mind, that the time is not far distant, when his skull
will not be distinguished from that of the beggar; and that there is no
state, however exalted, so permanent, that it may not be reduced to a
level with the lowest.






THE HAWK AND THE FARMER.


A Hawk, in the eagerness of his pursuit after a Pigeon, flew with
such violence against the corner of a hedge, that he was stunned and
fell. A Farmer, who had been looking about his fields, saw the whole
transaction, and instantly ran and picked up the Hawk, and was going to
kill him; but the latter begged the Man would let him go, assuring him
he was only following a Pigeon, and neither intending, nor had done,
any harm to him. To which the Farmer replied, and what harm had the
Pigeon done to you? and wrung his head off immediately.


APPLICATION.

In all our transactions through life, to suppose ourselves in the place
of those we may be dealing with, will be the most certain check upon
our own conduct; and we ought always to consult our conscience about
the rectitude of our behaviour: for this we may be assured of, that we
are acting wrong, whenever we are doing any thing to another, which we
should think unjust, if it were done to us. Let those, therefore, who
intend to act justly, but take this view of things, and all will be
well. There will be no danger of their oppressing others, or fear of
their falling into error or danger themselves. Nothing but an habitual
inadvertency as to this particular, can be the occasion of so many
ingenuous noble spirits being so often engaged in courses opposite to
virtue and honour.








THE FOX AND THE COUNTRYMAN.


A Fox being closely pursued by the Hunters, and almost run down,
begged of a Countryman to give him protection, and save his life. The
Man consented, and pointed out a hovel, into which the Fox crept, and
covered himself up among some straw. Presently up came the Hunters, and
enquired of the Man it he had seen the Fox, and which way he had taken?
No, said he, I have not seen him here, he has passed another way; but
all the while he nodded with his head, and pointed with his finger
to the place where the Fox was hidden. These signals the Hunters, in
the eagerness of pursuit, did not notice, but calling off the dogs,
they dashed along in another direction. Soon after, the Fox came out
of his hiding-place, and was sneaking off; when the Man calling after
him,--Hollo, says he, is this the way you behave then, to go without
thanking the benefactor who has saved your life? Reynard, who had
peeped all the while, and had seen what passed, answered, I know what
obligation I owe you well enough, and I assure you if your actions had
agreed with your words, I should have endeavoured, however incapable of
it, to have returned you suitable thanks.


APPLICATION.

Dissimulation and double dealing are among the most odious vices,
and a hollow friend is worse than an open enemy; for in the full
confidence of friendship, we are led to depend upon the man who uses
that confidence to betray us. To pretend to keep another’s council, and
appear in his interest, while underhand we are giving intelligence to
his enemies, is treacherous, knavish, and base. Truth is a plain and
open virtue, and cannot be practised in part; and truth and sincerity
are the same; wherefore he that equivocates and adheres to his promise
in one sense, without preserving it inviolably in its full extent and
meaning, departs as much from truth and sincerity as the most direct
liar.

    “And be those juggling friends no more believ’d,
    That palter with us in a double sense;
    That keep the word of promise to the ear,
    And break it to our hope.”






ÆSOP AT PLAY.


An Athenian one day found Æsop entertaining himself with a company of
little Boys at their childish diversions, and began to jeer and laugh
at him for it. Æsop, who was too much a wag himself to suffer others to
ridicule him, took a bow unstrung, and laid it upon the ground. Then
calling the censorious Athenian, Now philosopher, says he, expound
the riddle if you can, and tell us what the unstrained bow implies.
The Man, after racking his brains a considerable time to no purpose,
at last gave it up, and declared he knew not what to make of it. Why,
says Æsop, smiling, if you keep a bow always bent, it will lose its
elasticity presently; but if you let it go slack, it will be fitter for
use when you want it.


APPLICATION.

The mind of man is not formed for unremitted attention, nor his body
for uninterrupted labour; and both are in this respect like a bow.
We cannot go through any business requiring intense thought, without
unbending the mind, any more than we can perform a long journey without
refreshing ourselves by due rest at the several stages of it. Continual
labour, as in the case of the bended bow, destroys the elasticity and
energy of both body and mind. It is, therefore, absolutely necessary
for the studious man to unbend, and the laborious one to take his rest,
or both lose their tone and vigour, and become dull and languid. It
is to remedy these extremes, that pastimes and diversions ought to be
kept up, provided they are innocent. The heart that never tastes of
pleasure, shuts up, grows stiff, and is at last incapable of enjoyment.








THE FOX AND THE WOLF.


The Wolf having laid in a store of provisions, snugly kept in his den,
and indulged himself in feasting upon them. The Fox observing this
seclusion of the Wolf, became inquisitive to know the cause, and by
way of satisfying his curiosity and his suspicions, he went and paid
the Wolf a visit. The latter excused himself from seeing the Fox,
by pretending he was very much indisposed. The Fox having smelt how
matters stood, took his leave, and immediately went to a Shepherd to
inform him of the discovery he had made, and that he had nothing else
to do but to take a good weapon with him, and with it easily dispatch
the Wolf as he lay dosing in his cave. The Shepherd following his
directions, presently went and killed the Wolf. The wicked Fox then
slily took possession of the cave and the provisions to himself; but
he did not enjoy them long, for the same Shepherd shortly afterwards
passing by the place, and seeing the Fox there, dispatched him also.


APPLICATION.

A villain, whose only aim is to get what he can, will as soon betray
the innocent as the guilty. Let him but know where there is a suspected
person, and propose a reward, and he will seldom fail to work the
suspicion up to high treason, and will be at no loss to produce
sufficient proofs of it. Men of this stamp will not be content with
practising one single villainy; for having never laid down any good
principles for their guide, they will go on triumphantly in their
wickedness for a time, and though, perhaps, they may be the instruments
of bringing other villains to punishment, yet they will at last suffer
in their turn; for, after being detested by all good men, justice will,
sooner or later, overtake their crimes, and hurl down its vengeance
on their heads, with a measure equal at least to the sufferings their
perfidy has occasioned to others. The fate of such wretches can never
excite the smallest commiseration; for no character is so truly
detestable, as that of a spy and informer.








THE RAVEN AND THE SERPENT.


A Raven in quest of food, seeing a Serpent basking in the sun, soused
down, seized it with his horny beak, and attempted to carry it off.
But the Serpent, writhing with the pain, twisted its elastic coils so
firmly about the Raven, and bit him with such envenomed fierceness,
that he fell to the ground mortally wounded. In the agonies of death,
the Raven confessed this was a just punishment upon him, for having
attempted to satisfy his greedy appetite at the expence of another’s
welfare.


APPLICATION.

When men suffer their passions to set aside their reason, they soon
become sensual in their appetites, and inordinate in their desires.
Moral rectitude takes its departure from their minds, and led by
their evil spirit, they soon become fitted for the commission of
any enormity. They give the rein to their unbridled lusts, and
regardless of consequences, stop at nothing to gratify their brutal
desires. But if we mark the progress of such men through life, it
will be found that, besides losing the great and virtuous pleasures
of self-approbation, and incurring the stings of a guilty conscience,
their wicked career often meets just punishment from retaliations in
kind, which the objects of their iniquitous proceedings unexpectedly
retort upon them.








THE DOVE AND THE BEE.


A Bee, whose business had led her to the brink of a purling stream,
was snatched away by its circling eddy, and carried down its current.
A Dove, pitying her distressed situation, cropped a twig from a tree,
and dropt it before her in the water, by means of which the Bee saved
herself, and got ashore. Not long after, a Fowler having a design upon
the Dove, espied her sitting on a tree, and keeping out of her sight,
was waiting the opportunity of shooting her. This the Bee perceiving,
stung him on the ear, which made him give so sudden a start, that the
Dove instantly took the alarm, and flew away.


APPLICATION.

We ought ever with a ready zeal to extend our arm to relieve a sinking
friend from distress and danger, or endeavour to forewarn him against
the wicked plots of his enemies. The benevolent man, from the most
disinterested motives, will always be disposed to do good offices to
all, and the grateful man will never forget to return them in kind, if
it be possible; and there is not one good man in the world who may not
on some occasion stand in need of the help of another. But gratitude
is not very common among mankind. It is a heavenly spark, from which
many virtues spring; and the source of pleasures which never enter the
breast of the vile ingrate. The favours and kindnesses bestowed upon
the grateful man, he cannot forget; those which are conferred upon the
ungrateful, are lost: he concludes he would not have had them, if he
had not deserved them.








THE SERPENT AND THE MAN.


A Child was playing in a meadow, and by chance trod upon a Serpent.
The Serpent, in the fury of his passion, turned up and bit the Child
with his venomous teeth, so that he died immediately. The Father of the
Child, inspired with grief and revenge, took a weapon, and pursuing the
Serpent, before he could get into his hole, struck at him and lopped
off a piece of his tail. The next day, hoping by stratagem to finish
his revenge, he brought to the Serpent’s hole honey, and meal, and
salt, and desired him to come forth, protesting that he only sought a
reconciliation on both sides; but the Serpent answered him with a hiss
to this purpose: In vain you attempt a reconciliation; for as long as
the memory of the dead Child and the mangled tail subsists, it will be
impossible for you and I to have any charity for each other.


APPLICATION.

When persons have carried their differences to an extreme length, it
is in vain for them to think of renewing a cordial friendship; for in
the heat of their quarrel, many injuries must have been reciprocally
offered and received, which must tear asunder the strongest bands
of amity. The fury of their dissentions may indeed subside, yet
neither party can forgive the wrongs which neither can forget. The
consciousness of having provoked the resentment of another, will dwell
so continually upon the mind of the aggressor, that he cannot rest till
he has finished his work, and put it as much as possible out of his
enemy’s power to make any return upon him; and the old proverb will be
verified which says, “The man who has injured you, will never forgive
you.” Morality bids us forgive our enemies, and the voice of reason
confirms the same; but neither reason nor morality bids us enter into
a friendship with, or repose a confidence in, those who have injured
us, and of whom we have a bad opinion. We may resolve not to return
ill-usage; but ought never to put ourselves into the power of an enemy.








THE HORSE AND THE OVER-LOADED ASS.


A clownish stupid Fellow, in travelling to market with his goods,
loaded his Horse very lightly, and put a heavy burden upon his Ass, and
was trudging along the road with them on foot. They had not travelled
half-way to their journey’s end, when the Ass felt greatly overpowered
with the weight he carried, and begged the Horse would be so good
as to assist him by taking a part of it upon his back, and lighten
the grievous burden, assuring him that through weakness he was quite
exhausted, and was ready to faint. No! said the Horse, keep your burden
to yourself, it does not concern me. Upon hearing this cruel reply,
the poor Ass dropped down, and soon expired. The Master then ungirded
the pack-saddle, and awkwardly tried several ways to relieve his Ass,
but all to no purpose; it was too late. When he perceived how matters
stood, he took the whole burden and laid it upon the Horse, together
with the skin of the dead Ass, and when he felt tired with walking, he
also mounted himself. The Horse is said to have often muttered as he
went along, Well, this is my proper punishment, for refusing to help my
fellow-servant in the depth of his distress.


APPLICATION.

He who has no compassion in his breast, is unworthy the title of a man;
and the heart that feels no anguish at the misfortunes of others, nor a
desire to relieve those who groan under a load of sorrow, is destitute
of the very grounds and principles of virtue. The eye that has no tear
for the griefs of a friend, is also blind to its own interest; for the
burden of human affairs must be borne by some or other of us, and the
duty, as well as the common necessity of helping one another, ought
not to be shuffled off by the unworthy expression of “it is none of my
business:” for the business of society is more or less the business
of every man who lives in it; and he who permits his weak brother,
for want of timely assistance, to sink under a greater weight than he
is able to sustain, deserves to be punished for his cruelty, by being
obliged to bear the whole of his own distressing burdens himself.
The Fable also hints at the miseries which poor dumb useful animals
undergo, from the injudicious management or cruel treatment of those
under whose government they have the misfortune to fall. These kind
of “hogs in armour” ought to be taught by their own sufferings, the
benevolent text, that “A merciful man will be merciful to his beast.”






THE HUSBANDMAN AND THE STORK.


A Husbandman having placed nets in his fields to catch the Rooks and
the Geese, which came to feed upon the new-sown corn, found among his
prisoners a single Stork, who happened to be in their company. The
Stork pleaded hard for his life, and among other arguments, alleged
that he was neither Goose nor Crow, but a poor harmless Stork, whose
attachment to mankind, and his services to them in picking up noxious
creatures, as well as fulfilling his duties to his aged parents, he
trusted, were well known. All this may be true, says the Husbandman,
for what I know; but as I have taken you in company with thieves, and
in the same crime, you must also share the same fate with them.


APPLICATION.

When we become so abandoned to stupidity and a disregard of our
reputation, as to keep bad company, however little we may be criminal
in reality, we must expect the same censure and punishment as is due
to the most notorious of our companions. The world will always form an
idea of the character of every man from his associates: nor is this
rule founded on wrong principles; for, generally speaking, those who
are constant companions, are either drawn together by a similitude of
manners and principles, or form such a similitude by daily commerce and
conversation. If, therefore, we are tender of our reputation, we should
be particularly delicate in the choice of our company, since some
portion of their fame or infamy must unavoidably be reflected upon us.
It is not enough to be virtuous ourselves, but we must be cautious not
to associate with those who are devoted to vice: for, though we cannot
confer any degree of our own credit upon them, we may suffer much
discredit, and incur much danger, from mixing with such bad companions.








THE TRAVELLERS AND THE BEAR.


Two Men being to travel through a forest together, mutually engaged
to stand by each other in any danger they might encounter on the way.
They had not gone far, before a Bear rushed towards them out of a
thicket; upon which, one of them, being a light nimble fellow, got up
the branches of a tree, and kept out of sight. The other falling flat
upon his face, and holding his breath, lay still, while the Bear came
up and smelled at him, but not discovering any marks of life, he walked
quietly away again to the place of his retreat, without doing the Man
the least harm. When all was over, the Spark who had climbed the tree,
came down to his Companion, and asked him, what the Bear said to him?
for, says he, I took notice that he clapt his mouth very close to your
ear. Why, said the other, he advised me, for the future never to place
any confidence in such a faithless poltroon as you.


APPLICATION.

There is nothing in this world that can lighten our burdens, in
passing through it, or contribute more to our happiness, than our
knowing we have a true friend, who will commiserate with and help us
in our misfortunes, and on whom we can rely in times of difficulty and
distress. There are many, indeed, who, with fair words, pretend to
that character, and are ever ready to offer their services when there
is no occasion for their help. But the real friend, like gold from
the furnace, shines forth in his true lustre, and with heart and hand
is ever ready to succour us, in times of tribulation and peril. It
is on such only we ought to place a confidence in any undertaking of
importance; for the man who is wholly actuated by the selfish unsocial
principle of caring only for himself, is not fit to be associated
with others of a more generous character; and he who will desert them
in adversity ought not to be made a partaker of the prosperity of
others. It therefore behoves us diligently to examine into the fidelity
of those we have to deal with, before we embark with them in any
enterprise, in which our lives and fortunes may be put to hazard by
their breach of faith.






THE FIGHTING COCKS.


After a fierce battle between two Cocks for the sovereignty of the
dunghill, one of them having beaten his antagonist, he that was
vanquished slunk away and crept into a corner, where he for some time
hid himself; but the conqueror flew up to a high place, and clapped his
wings, crowing and proclaiming his victory. An Eagle, who was watching
for his prey, saw him from afar off, and in the midst of his exultation
darted down upon him, trussed him up, and bore him away. The vanquished
Cock perceiving this, quitted the place of his retreat, and shaking
his feathers and throwing off all remembrance of his late disgrace,
returned to the dunghill, and gallanted the Hens, as if nothing had
happened.


APPLICATION.

This Fable shews us the impropriety and inconvenience of running
into extremes, and teaches us, that under all the various and sudden
vicissitudes of human life, we ought to bear success with moderation,
and misfortune with fortitude and equinamity; to repress immoderate
exultation, and unmanly despair. Much of our happiness depends upon
keeping an even balance in our words and actions, and in not suffering
circumstances to mount us too high in time of prosperity, nor to sink
us too low with the weight of adverse fortune. A wise man will not
place too high a value on blessings which he knows to be no more than
temporary; nor will he repine at evils, whose duration may perhaps be
but short, and cannot be eternal. He will submit himself with humility
and resignation to the decrees of providence, and the will of heaven.
In prosperity, the fear of evil will check the insolence of triumph;
and in adversity, the hope of good will sustain his spirit, and teach
him to endure his misfortunes with constancy and fortitude.








THE WILD AND THE TAME GEESE.


A flock of Wild Geese and a parcel of Tame ones used often to feed
together in a corn field. At last, the Owner of the corn, with his
servants, coming upon them of a sudden, surprised them in the very
fact, and the Tame Geese being heavy, and fat full-bodied creatures,
were most of them sufferers; but the wild ones being thin and light,
easily flew away.


APPLICATION.

When the enemy comes to make a seizure, they are sure to suffer most
whose circumstances are the richest and fattest. In any case of
persecution, money hangs like a dead weight about a man; and we never
feel gold so heavy as when we are endeavouring to make off with it.
Great wealth has many cares annexed to it, with which the poor and
needy are not afflicted. A competency to supply the necessities of
nature, and the wants of old age, is indeed to be desired; but we
should rather endeavour to contract our wants, than to multiply them,
and not too eagerly grasp at the augmentation of our possessions,
which will increase our cares by adding to our danger. Persons of
small fortune have as much reason to be contented as the rich: their
situation is full as happy, considered altogether, for if they are
deprived of some of the gratifications which the rich enjoy, they are
also exempted from many troubles and uneasinesses necessarily cleaving
to riches.








THE FROGS AND THE MICE.


The Frogs and the Mice, who inhabited part of a most extensive fen,
(of which there remained unoccupied sufficient room to hold many
whole nations of both) could not agree with each other so as to live
in peace: many bitter disputes arose between them about the right to
particular pools, and their tuft-covered margins. At length, national
jealousies and animosities arose to such a height, that each claimed
the sovereignty of the whole fen, and the most rancorous war was waged
between them, in order to settle, by force of arms, their respective
pretensions. While their hostile armies were drawn up in battle array,
on a plain of several square yards in extent, protected on both flanks
and rear by dark pools and gloomy forests of sedges, reeds, and
bulrushes, their two chieftains advanced to meet each other, and to
it they fell as fierce as tigers. While these two combatants were thus
engaged, a Kite sailing in the air, beheld them from a great distance,
and darting down upon them, instantly bore them off in his talons;
while the field of battle presented a delicious repast to some Ravens,
who had chanced to spy the movements of these hostile armies.


APPLICATION.

The leading feature in the character of men, in all ages of the world,
has ever been self-interest; and when this is not kept within due
bounds, by a just sense of morality and honour, their bad passions
are let loose, and money, power, or dominion, are the chief objects
they keep in view. When men thus depraved, have long soared above
restraint, and their numbers and power become predominant in a nation,
the accumulation of their wickedness hurries them blindly on to break
out into offensive wars with other nations, on the most frivolous
pretences, and rapine, plunder, and innumerable murders succeed, by
which humanity is outraged, and the fair face of nature is deluged
with blood. “Peace is the natural happy state of man, and war is his
disgrace.” The mighty among the Frogs and Mice attend not to this: they
strut and exult for a time; but their pride, tyranny, and injustice,
will have an end: for opposed to these vices are the attributes of
Omnipotence, and they are eternal. It often happens (as in the case of
the combatants in the Fable) that when national depravity has attained
its height, the Kites and Ravens of other regions are invited forth,
and made the instruments of a just retribution.






THE FOWLER AND THE LARK.


A Fowler set his snares to catch birds in the open field. A Lark was
caught; and finding herself entangled, could not forbear lamenting her
hard fate. Ah! woe is me, says she, what crime have I committed that
man should be plotting my destruction? I have not taken either his
silver or gold, or any thing of value to him; and while other rapacious
birds deal about destruction and go unpunished, I must die for only
picking up a single grain of corn.


APPLICATION.

The irregular administration of justice in the world, is indeed a
melancholy subject to think of. A poor fellow shall be hanged for
stealing a sheep, perhaps to keep his family from starving; while
one, who is already great and opulent, will not scruple to add to his
overflowing wealth by the most bare-faced peculation upon the public,
and yet shall escape punishment, and even censure, through powerful
interest with those who ought to be his judges, but allow themselves
to be swayed by the splendour of his connections, or corrupted by his
money. When justice is intrusted in such hands, then shall we see the
description given by one of our satirical poets, of a corrupt court of
law, realized. He calls it a place,

    Where little villains must submit to fate,
    That great ones may enjoy the world in state.

However, let no one, who violates the law, rest his defence on this
plea; for though crimes, committed by his superiors, ought not to
escape with impunity, yet his own nevertheless deserve punishment.
Hence we may also draw a hint, not unworthy of our attention, to
endeavour to preserve our own integrity, unshaken in the midst of
iniquity, and to shew ourselves unstained by the corruption even of the
worst of times.








THE SHEPHERD TURNED MERCHANT.


A Shepherd was feeding his flock, on a very fine day, near the
sea-side. The beauty of the weather, the smoothness of the water, and
the ships with spreading sails floating along its surface, formed
altogether so charming a scene, that he lost all relish for a pastoral
life; and lured also by the prospect of gain, he determined to quit
an employment, which he now despised as yielding neither honour
nor profit. He quickly sold off his flocks, and commenced merchant
adventurer; and ere long, he embarked with his whole property on the
ocean. The ship had not long been at sea before a dreadful tempest
arose, which wrecked her and all her cargo; but our merchant and the
crew were fortunate enough to escape with their lives. The adventurer
having thus lost his all, returned to his former farm, and was glad to
hire himself to the man who had bought his stock, to attend the sheep
which were once his own. One day, as he sat meditating upon the change
that had happened, and viewing the sea calm and unruffled as before,
Ah! says he, thou deceitful tempting element, experience has made me
so wise, that if I should again acquire a property, I will never more
trust it upon thy faithless bosom.


APPLICATION.

This Fable is intended to put men of fickle unsettled minds upon their
guard against that propensity which often inclines them so strongly
to shifting and changing, and leads them to imagine they would be
happier in any profession than the one to which they have been brought
up. By this disposition they are led away from an honest competency,
to adventure their all upon untried schemes, in the hope of bettering
their condition. But men of this wavering temper, who are comfortably
settled in the world, would do well to reflect, before they change
their situation, and rashly venture, perhaps, the acquisitions of their
whole life, on projects, the failure of which may subject them to great
calamities, which will be the more intolerable to bear, as they will
not have adverse fortune to blame, but merely their own folly. Of this
truth, experience will convince them when it is too late.








THE COCK AND THE FOX.


A Fox, in one of his early visits to the farm-yard, happened to be
caught in a springe, which had been set for that very purpose; and
while he was struggling to escape, he was observed by the Cock, who,
with his Hens, was feeding near the place. The Cock, dreading so
dangerous a foe, approached him with the utmost caution. Reynard no
sooner cast his eye upon him, than with all the smooth and designing
artifice imaginable, thus addressed him. My dear friend, says he,
you see what an unfortunate accident has befallen me here, and all
upon your account, for not having heard you crow for a long time
past, I was resolved on my way homeward to pay you a friendly visit;
I therefore beg you will bring me something to cut this tormenting
wire, or at least be so good as to conceal my misfortune till I have
knawed it asunder. Yes, said the Cock, I can guess what kind of a
visit you intended to pay me, and will fetch you the proper assistance
immediately. He then hastened and told the Farmer, who instantly went
to the place, and knocked the Fox on the head.


APPLICATION.

When the innocent fall into misfortune, it is the part of a generous
and brave spirit to contribute as far as possible to their relief; and
there is no quality of mind more amiable than that of tenderly feeling
for the distressed: but we ought not to let our compassion flow out
upon improper objects, lest we may, by saving a villain, be doing an
act of injustice to the community. When wicked men are entrapped in
their own pernicious schemes, and laid hold of by the arm of justice,
it is a misplaced lenity to endeavour to screen or protect them from
it, as by letting them loose to continue their depredations, we become
the advocates for their crimes, and in some degree partakers in their
enormities.








THE YOUNG MAN AND HIS CAT.


A certain Young Man used to play with a beautiful Cat, of which he grew
so fond, that at last he fell in love with it to such a degree, that
he could rest neither night nor day for the excess of his passion. In
this condition he prayed to Venus, the goddess of beauty, to pity and
relieve his pain. The good-natured goddess was propitious, and heard
his prayers; and the Cat, which he held in his arms, was instantly
transformed into a beautiful Young Woman. The Youth was transported
with joy, and married her that very day. At night, while they were in
bed, the bride unfortunately heard a mouse behind the hangings, and
sprang from the arms of her lover to pursue it: the Youth was ashamed,
and Venus offended, to see her sacred rites thus profaned by such
unbecoming behaviour; and perceiving that her new convert, though a
woman in outward appearance, was a Cat in her heart, she caused her
to return to her old form again, that her manners and person might be
suitable to each other.


APPLICATION.

This Fable, however extravagant and unnatural in its composition, is
intended to depicture and check the blind instinctive ardour of the
passion of love, the transports of which cover all imperfections, so
that its devotees consider neither quality nor merit. It is like an
idol of our own creating, which we fashion into whatever figure or
shape we please, and then run mad for it. The Fable also shews that

    “No charm can raise from dirt a grov’ling mind;”

And that people of a low turn of spirit and mean education, cannot
change their principles by changing their situation: for in the midst
of splendour and magnificence, they still retain the same narrow
sentiments, and seldom fail to betray, by some dirty action, their
original baseness, which no embroidery can conceal; and though fortune
has been pleased to lift them out of the mire, we still see the silly
awkward blockheads displaying their lack of mind and education through
all their ensigns of dignity. If any thing more need be added, it can
only be with a view of more plainly putting inexperienced youth on
their guard against making inconsiderate connections, lest they take a
Cat into their bosom, instead of an amiable consort and companion for
life.






THE FOWLER AND THE PARTRIDGE.


A Fowler having taken a Partridge in his nets, the bird begged hard
for a reprieve, and promised the man, if he would let him go, to decoy
the other Partridges into his snares. No, replies the Fowler, if I had
before been undetermined what to do with you, now you have condemned
yourself by your own words: for he who is such a scoundrel as to offer
to betray his friends, to save himself, deserves if possible worse than
death.


APPLICATION.

To betray our friends is one of the blackest of crimes; and however
much traitors may suppose they recommend themselves by their successful
acts of treachery, they will find that those who employ them as useful
instruments in any dirty business of faction or party, are shocked at
the baseness of their minds; and however convenient it may be to “like
the treason, the traitor will be despised.” History furnishes us with
many instances of kings and great men who have punished the actors of
treachery with death, though the part they acted had been so conducive
to their interests as to give them a victory, or perhaps the quiet
possession of a throne: nor can princes pursue a more just maxim than
this, for a traitor is a villain, and sticks at nothing to promote his
own selfish ends. He that will betray one master for a bribe, will
betray another on the same account. It is therefore impolitic in any
state to suffer such wretches to live under its protection. Since then
this maxim is so good, and likely at all times to be acted upon, what
stupid rogues must they be who undertake such precarious dirty work!








THE BLIND MAN AND THE LAME.


A blind Man and a lame Man happening to come at the same time to a
piece of very bad road, the former begged of the latter that he would
be so kind as to guide him through the difficulty. How can I do that,
said the lame Man, since I am scarcely able to drag myself along? But
as you appear to be very strong, if you will carry me, we will seek our
fortunes together. It will then be my interest to warn you against any
thing that may obstruct your way; your feet shall be my feet, and my
eyes your’s. With all my heart, replied the blind Man; let us mutually
serve each other. So, taking his lame companion on his back, they by
means of this union travelled on with safety and pleasure.


APPLICATION.

There is no such thing as absolute independence, in a state of society,
and the defects and weaknesses of individuals form the cement by which
it is bound together. All men have their imperfections and wants, and
must help each other as a matter of expediency as well as virtue; for
Providence has so ordered things in this life, that like the blind
man and the lame in the Fable, we may be serviceable to each other in
almost every instance. What one man wants another supplies. Without
these failings there would be neither friendship nor company; so that
it is our interest to be both charitable and sociable, when our very
wants and necessities are converted by Providence into blessings. The
whole race of mankind ought indeed to be but so many members of the
same body; and in contributing to the ease and convenience of each
other, we are not only serviceable to the whole, but kind to ourselves.








THE LION, THE WOLF, AND THE DOG.


A Lion having seized upon a Doe, while he was standing over his prize,
a Wolf stepped up to him, and impudently claimed to go halves. No! said
the Lion, you are too apt to take what is not your due. I therefore
shall never have any thing to do with you, and I peremptorily insist
on your immediate departure out of my sight. A poor honest Dog, who
happened to be passing, and heard what was going on, modestly withdrew,
intending to go about another way. Upon which the Lion kindly invited
him to come forward and partake with him of the feast, to which his
modesty had given him so good a title.


APPLICATION.

There is something in modesty which ought ever strongly to prepossess
us in favour of those persons in whose nature it is interwoven; and
men of discerning and generous minds have a pleasure in discovering
it, and in bringing into notice the worthy man, who is diffident of
his merit, and cannot prevail upon himself to challenge the praise or
tribute he deserves. It is, however, to be lamented, that such patrons
are not very numerous, and that the assuming arrogance and teasing
importunities of the greedy forward man should so commonly succeed in
attaining his ends, while modesty in silence starves unnoticed, and
is for ever poor. Were men in exalted stations of life to pay more
attention to the importance of this, and endeavour to discover modest
worth, to draw merit from the shade, and virtue from obscurity, and
distribute their patronage and their favours to such only, their own
affairs, as well as those of the public, would be better managed, and
the difference between the conduct of upstart pride and sensible plain
honesty would soon shew itself in its true unvarnished colours.








THE ASS EATING THISTLES.


An Ass was loaded with provisions of several sorts, which he was
carrying home for a grand entertainment. By the way, he met with a fine
large Thistle, and being very hungry, immediately eat it up, which,
while he was doing, he entered into this reflection: How many greedy
epicures would think themselves happy amidst such a variety of delicate
viands as I now carry! But to me, this bitter prickly Thistle is more
savory and relishing than the most exquisite and sumptuous banquet.


APPLICATION.

Temperance and exercise may be regarded as the constituents of natural
luxury. It is not in the power of the whole art of cookery, to give
such an exquisite relish and seasoning to a dish, as these two will
confer on the plainest fare. Indolent epicures have no true taste:
they subsist entirely by whets and provocatives of appetite; but he
whose stomach is braced and strengthened by exercise, has a whet
within himself, which adds a poignancy to every morsel that he eats.
Providence seems to have carved out its blessings with an equal hand,
and what it has denied to the poor in one way, it has amply supplied
them with in another: if it have withheld riches, it has given them
a greater store of health; and if it have refused them the means of
luxury, it has at least formed them with the capacity of living as
happily without it. And it may further be observed, that if we except
hereditary diseases, almost every other ailment may be laid to the
account of indolence, intemperance, or anxiety of mind.








THE DOG AND THE CAT.


Never were two creatures happier together than a Dog and a Cat, reared
in the same house from the time of their birth. They were so kind, so
gamesome, and diverting, that it was half the entertainment of the
family to see the gambols and love tricks that passed between them.
Still it was observed, that at mealtimes, when scraps fell from the
table, or a tit-bit was thrown to them, they would be snarling and
spitting at one another like the bitterest foes.


APPLICATION.

This Fable is too true a picture of the practices and friendships
of the world. We first enter into agreeable conversations, contract
likings, and form close intimacies and connections, which one would
think nothing could ever break up; but clashing interests at length
come in the way, and dissolve the charm. An unreasonable desire to
engross more than we can enjoy, is the bone of contention, which in
greater or less degrees sets mankind together by the ears. A jealous
thought, a mistaken word or look, is then sufficient to cancel all
former bonds: the league is broken, and the farce concludes like the
Dog and the Cat in the Fable, with biting and scratching out one
another’s eyes. The same kind of over-grasping selfishness which
operates so powerfully upon and blinds individuals, may with equal
truth be charged against all public associations or societies of men,
from the greatest to the least, when they are under the influence of
that mistaken patriotism, which, instead of applying its powers to
the improvement of what they already possess, seeks aggrandizement by
engrossing the colonies or privileges of their less powerful neighbours.








THE TRUMPETER TAKEN PRISONER.


A Trumpeter, being taken prisoner in battle, begged hard for quarter,
declaring his innocence, and protesting, that he neither had killed
nor could kill any man, bearing no arms but his trumpet, which he was
obliged to sound at the word of command. For that reason, replied his
enemies, we are determined not to spare you; for though you yourself
never fight, yet, with that wicked instrument of yours, you blow up
animosity among other people, and so become the cause of much bloodshed.


APPLICATION.

The fomenter of mischief is at least as culpable as he who puts it
in execution. A man may be guilty of murder, who never has handled a
sword or pulled a trigger, or lifted up his arm with any mischievous
weapon. There is a little incendiary called the tongue, which is more
venomous than a poisoned arrow, and more killing than a two-edged
sword. The moral of the Fable therefore is this, that if in any civil
insurrection, the persons taken in arms against the government deserve
to die, much more do they whose devilish tongues or pens gave birth
to the sedition, and excited the tumult. The Fable is also equally
applicable to those evil counsellors, who excite corrupt or wicked
governments to sap and undermine, and then to overturn the just laws
and liberties of a whole people; or involve them in cruel offensive
wars, in which they cause thousands upon thousands of swords to
be drawn, and whole armies of men to be cut in pieces, while they
themselves coolly sit out of danger, and calculate the gains they
derive from the wide-spreading desolation. War is the most horrid
custom that ever resulted from human wickedness, and is caused only by
the ignorance of the people, or the wickedness of governments.








THE BOYS AND THE FROGS.


A company of idle Boys used to assemble on the margin of a lake,
inhabited by a great number of Frogs, and divert themselves by throwing
vollies of stones into the water, to the great annoyance and danger
of the poor terrified Frogs, who were thus pelted to death as soon as
any of them put up their heads. At length, one of the boldest of the
Frogs ventured, in behalf of the whole community, to croak out their
complaints. Ah, my Boys, said he, why will you learn so soon the cruel
practices of your race? Consider, I beseech you, that though this may
be sport to you, it is death to us!


APPLICATION.

This Fable shews the propensity of unguided youth to do evil, and
points out the need of inculcating benignity of conduct upon their
minds, and giving them a direction towards a manly and generous
humanity, which in manhood will shew itself in actions and habits that
cannot fail to do honour to themselves, and qualify them for any office
in the service of their country. The contrary of all this will be
found to predominate in society, when youth are suffered to go on with
impunity, in indulging their wicked inclinations for cruelty, by which
their minds are hardened and debased. This hard-heartedness in boys
will grow into brutality and tyranny in man; and that cruelty which
was at first inflicted upon poor dumb animals, will soon shew itself
upon their fellows. The great man of this cast will tyrannize over
those below him: these again will shew the same hateful disposition to
their dependants, and so downwards to the lowest, who, guided only by
ignorance, will give vent to their natural baseness, by goading and
distressing the poor animals which are wretchedly toiling in their
service.
THE GOLDEN BIRD

A certain king had a beautiful garden, and in the garden stood a tree
which bore golden apples. These apples were always counted, and about
the time when they began to grow ripe it was found that every night one
of them was gone. The king became very angry at this, and ordered the
gardener to keep watch all night under the tree. The gardener set his
eldest son to watch; but about twelve o’clock he fell asleep, and in
the morning another of the apples was missing. Then the second son was
ordered to watch; and at midnight he too fell asleep, and in the morning
another apple was gone. Then the third son offered to keep watch; but
the gardener at first would not let him, for fear some harm should come
to him: however, at last he consented, and the young man laid himself
under the tree to watch. As the clock struck twelve he heard a rustling
noise in the air, and a bird came flying that was of pure gold; and as
it was snapping at one of the apples with its beak, the gardener’s son
jumped up and shot an arrow at it. But the arrow did the bird no harm;
only it dropped a golden feather from its tail, and then flew away.
The golden feather was brought to the king in the morning, and all the
council was called together. Everyone agreed that it was worth more than
all the wealth of the kingdom: but the king said, ‘One feather is of no
use to me, I must have the whole bird.’

Then the gardener’s eldest son set out and thought to find the golden
bird very easily; and when he had gone but a little way, he came to a
wood, and by the side of the wood he saw a fox sitting; so he took his
bow and made ready to shoot at it. Then the fox said, ‘Do not shoot me,
for I will give you good counsel; I know what your business is, and
that you want to find the golden bird. You will reach a village in the
evening; and when you get there, you will see two inns opposite to each
other, one of which is very pleasant and beautiful to look at: go not in
there, but rest for the night in the other, though it may appear to you
to be very poor and mean.’ But the son thought to himself, ‘What can
such a beast as this know about the matter?’ So he shot his arrow at
the fox; but he missed it, and it set up its tail above its back and
ran into the wood. Then he went his way, and in the evening came to
the village where the two inns were; and in one of these were people
singing, and dancing, and feasting; but the other looked very dirty,
and poor. ‘I should be very silly,’ said he, ‘if I went to that shabby
house, and left this charming place’; so he went into the smart house,
and ate and drank at his ease, and forgot the bird, and his country too.

Time passed on; and as the eldest son did not come back, and no tidings
were heard of him, the second son set out, and the same thing happened
to him. He met the fox, who gave him the good advice: but when he came
to the two inns, his eldest brother was standing at the window where
the merrymaking was, and called to him to come in; and he could not
withstand the temptation, but went in, and forgot the golden bird and
his country in the same manner.

Time passed on again, and the youngest son too wished to set out into
the wide world to seek for the golden bird; but his father would not
listen to it for a long while, for he was very fond of his son, and
was afraid that some ill luck might happen to him also, and prevent his
coming back. However, at last it was agreed he should go, for he would
not rest at home; and as he came to the wood, he met the fox, and heard
the same good counsel. But he was thankful to the fox, and did not
attempt his life as his brothers had done; so the fox said, ‘Sit upon my
tail, and you will travel faster.’ So he sat down, and the fox began to
run, and away they went over stock and stone so quick that their hair
whistled in the wind.

When they came to the village, the son followed the fox’s counsel, and
without looking about him went to the shabby inn and rested there all
night at his ease. In the morning came the fox again and met him as he
was beginning his journey, and said, ‘Go straight forward, till you come
to a castle, before which lie a whole troop of soldiers fast asleep and
snoring: take no notice of them, but go into the castle and pass on and
on till you come to a room, where the golden bird sits in a wooden cage;
close by it stands a beautiful golden cage; but do not try to take the
bird out of the shabby cage and put it into the handsome one, otherwise
you will repent it.’ Then the fox stretched out his tail again, and the
young man sat himself down, and away they went over stock and stone till
their hair whistled in the wind.

Before the castle gate all was as the fox had said: so the son went in
and found the chamber where the golden bird hung in a wooden cage, and
below stood the golden cage, and the three golden apples that had been
lost were lying close by it. Then thought he to himself, ‘It will be a
very droll thing to bring away such a fine bird in this shabby cage’; so
he opened the door and took hold of it and put it into the golden cage.
But the bird set up such a loud scream that all the soldiers awoke, and
they took him prisoner and carried him before the king. The next morning
the court sat to judge him; and when all was heard, it sentenced him to
die, unless he should bring the king the golden horse which could run as
swiftly as the wind; and if he did this, he was to have the golden bird
given him for his own.

So he set out once more on his journey, sighing, and in great despair,
when on a sudden his friend the fox met him, and said, ‘You see now
what has happened on account of your not listening to my counsel. I will
still, however, tell you how to find the golden horse, if you will do as
I bid you. You must go straight on till you come to the castle where the
horse stands in his stall: by his side will lie the groom fast asleep
and snoring: take away the horse quietly, but be sure to put the old
leathern saddle upon him, and not the golden one that is close by it.’
Then the son sat down on the fox’s tail, and away they went over stock
and stone till their hair whistled in the wind.

All went right, and the groom lay snoring with his hand upon the golden
saddle. But when the son looked at the horse, he thought it a great pity
to put the leathern saddle upon it. ‘I will give him the good one,’
said he; ‘I am sure he deserves it.’ As he took up the golden saddle the
groom awoke and cried out so loud, that all the guards ran in and took
him prisoner, and in the morning he was again brought before the court
to be judged, and was sentenced to die. But it was agreed, that, if he
could bring thither the beautiful princess, he should live, and have the
bird and the horse given him for his own.

Then he went his way very sorrowful; but the old fox came and said, ‘Why
did not you listen to me? If you had, you would have carried away
both the bird and the horse; yet will I once more give you counsel. Go
straight on, and in the evening you will arrive at a castle. At twelve
o’clock at night the princess goes to the bathing-house: go up to her
and give her a kiss, and she will let you lead her away; but take care
you do not suffer her to go and take leave of her father and mother.’
Then the fox stretched out his tail, and so away they went over stock
and stone till their hair whistled again.

As they came to the castle, all was as the fox had said, and at twelve
o’clock the young man met the princess going to the bath and gave her the
kiss, and she agreed to run away with him, but begged with many tears
that he would let her take leave of her father. At first he refused,
but she wept still more and more, and fell at his feet, till at last
he consented; but the moment she came to her father’s house the guards
awoke and he was taken prisoner again.

Then he was brought before the king, and the king said, ‘You shall never
have my daughter unless in eight days you dig away the hill that stops
the view from my window.’ Now this hill was so big that the whole world
could not take it away: and when he had worked for seven days, and had
done very little, the fox came and said. ‘Lie down and go to sleep; I
will work for you.’ And in the morning he awoke and the hill was gone;
so he went merrily to the king, and told him that now that it was
removed he must give him the princess.

Then the king was obliged to keep his word, and away went the young man
and the princess; and the fox came and said to him, ‘We will have all
three, the princess, the horse, and the bird.’ ‘Ah!’ said the young man,
‘that would be a great thing, but how can you contrive it?’

‘If you will only listen,’ said the fox, ‘it can be done. When you come
to the king, and he asks for the beautiful princess, you must say, “Here
she is!” Then he will be very joyful; and you will mount the golden
horse that they are to give you, and put out your hand to take leave of
them; but shake hands with the princess last. Then lift her quickly on
to the horse behind you; clap your spurs to his side, and gallop away as
fast as you can.’

All went right: then the fox said, ‘When you come to the castle where
the bird is, I will stay with the princess at the door, and you will
ride in and speak to the king; and when he sees that it is the right
horse, he will bring out the bird; but you must sit still, and say that
you want to look at it, to see whether it is the true golden bird; and
when you get it into your hand, ride away.’

This, too, happened as the fox said; they carried off the bird, the
princess mounted again, and they rode on to a great wood. Then the fox
came, and said, ‘Pray kill me, and cut off my head and my feet.’ But the
young man refused to do it: so the fox said, ‘I will at any rate give
you good counsel: beware of two things; ransom no one from the gallows,
and sit down by the side of no river.’ Then away he went. ‘Well,’
thought the young man, ‘it is no hard matter to keep that advice.’

He rode on with the princess, till at last he came to the village where
he had left his two brothers. And there he heard a great noise and
uproar; and when he asked what was the matter, the people said, ‘Two men
are going to be hanged.’ As he came nearer, he saw that the two men were
his brothers, who had turned robbers; so he said, ‘Cannot they in any
way be saved?’ But the people said ‘No,’ unless he would bestow all his
money upon the rascals and buy their liberty. Then he did not stay to
think about the matter, but paid what was asked, and his brothers were
given up, and went on with him towards their home.

And as they came to the wood where the fox first met them, it was so
cool and pleasant that the two brothers said, ‘Let us sit down by the
side of the river, and rest a while, to eat and drink.’ So he said,
‘Yes,’ and forgot the fox’s counsel, and sat down on the side of the
river; and while he suspected nothing, they came behind, and threw him
down the bank, and took the princess, the horse, and the bird, and went
home to the king their master, and said. ‘All this have we won by our
labour.’ Then there was great rejoicing made; but the horse would not
eat, the bird would not sing, and the princess wept.

The youngest son fell to the bottom of the river’s bed: luckily it was
nearly dry, but his bones were almost broken, and the bank was so steep
that he could find no way to get out. Then the old fox came once more,
and scolded him for not following his advice; otherwise no evil would
have befallen him: ‘Yet,’ said he, ‘I cannot leave you here, so lay hold
of my tail and hold fast.’ Then he pulled him out of the river, and said
to him, as he got upon the bank, ‘Your brothers have set watch to kill
you, if they find you in the kingdom.’ So he dressed himself as a poor
man, and came secretly to the king’s court, and was scarcely within the
doors when the horse began to eat, and the bird to sing, and the princess
left off weeping. Then he went to the king, and told him all his
brothers’ roguery; and they were seized and punished, and he had the
princess given to him again; and after the king’s death he was heir to
his kingdom.

A long while after, he went to walk one day in the wood, and the old fox
met him, and besought him with tears in his eyes to kill him, and cut
off his head and feet. And at last he did so, and in a moment the
fox was changed into a man, and turned out to be the brother of the
princess, who had been lost a great many many years.




HANS IN LUCK

Some men are born to good luck: all they do or try to do comes
right--all that falls to them is so much gain--all their geese are
swans--all their cards are trumps--toss them which way you will, they
will always, like poor puss, alight upon their legs, and only move on so
much the faster. The world may very likely not always think of them as
they think of themselves, but what care they for the world? what can it
know about the matter?

One of these lucky beings was neighbour Hans. Seven long years he had
worked hard for his master. At last he said, ‘Master, my time is up; I
must go home and see my poor mother once more: so pray pay me my wages
and let me go.’ And the master said, ‘You have been a faithful and good
servant, Hans, so your pay shall be handsome.’ Then he gave him a lump
of silver as big as his head.

Hans took out his pocket-handkerchief, put the piece of silver into it,
threw it over his shoulder, and jogged off on his road homewards. As he
went lazily on, dragging one foot after another, a man came in sight,
trotting gaily along on a capital horse. ‘Ah!’ said Hans aloud, ‘what a
fine thing it is to ride on horseback! There he sits as easy and happy
as if he was at home, in the chair by his fireside; he trips against no
stones, saves shoe-leather, and gets on he hardly knows how.’ Hans did
not speak so softly but the horseman heard it all, and said, ‘Well,
friend, why do you go on foot then?’ ‘Ah!’ said he, ‘I have this load to
carry: to be sure it is silver, but it is so heavy that I can’t hold up
my head, and you must know it hurts my shoulder sadly.’ ‘What do you say
of making an exchange?’ said the horseman. ‘I will give you my horse,
and you shall give me the silver; which will save you a great deal of
trouble in carrying such a heavy load about with you.’ ‘With all my
heart,’ said Hans: ‘but as you are so kind to me, I must tell you one
thing--you will have a weary task to draw that silver about with you.’
However, the horseman got off, took the silver, helped Hans up, gave him
the bridle into one hand and the whip into the other, and said, ‘When
you want to go very fast, smack your lips loudly together, and cry
“Jip!”’

Hans was delighted as he sat on the horse, drew himself up, squared his
elbows, turned out his toes, cracked his whip, and rode merrily off, one
minute whistling a merry tune, and another singing,

 ‘No care and no sorrow,
  A fig for the morrow!
  We’ll laugh and be merry,
  Sing neigh down derry!’

After a time he thought he should like to go a little faster, so he
smacked his lips and cried ‘Jip!’ Away went the horse full gallop; and
before Hans knew what he was about, he was thrown off, and lay on his
back by the road-side. His horse would have ran off, if a shepherd who
was coming by, driving a cow, had not stopped it. Hans soon came to
himself, and got upon his legs again, sadly vexed, and said to the
shepherd, ‘This riding is no joke, when a man has the luck to get upon
a beast like this that stumbles and flings him off as if it would break
his neck. However, I’m off now once for all: I like your cow now a great
deal better than this smart beast that played me this trick, and has
spoiled my best coat, you see, in this puddle; which, by the by, smells
not very like a nosegay. One can walk along at one’s leisure behind that
cow--keep good company, and have milk, butter, and cheese, every day,
into the bargain. What would I give to have such a prize!’ ‘Well,’ said
the shepherd, ‘if you are so fond of her, I will change my cow for your
horse; I like to do good to my neighbours, even though I lose by it
myself.’ ‘Done!’ said Hans, merrily. ‘What a noble heart that good man
has!’ thought he. Then the shepherd jumped upon the horse, wished Hans
and the cow good morning, and away he rode.

Hans brushed his coat, wiped his face and hands, rested a while, and
then drove off his cow quietly, and thought his bargain a very lucky
one. ‘If I have only a piece of bread (and I certainly shall always be
able to get that), I can, whenever I like, eat my butter and cheese with
it; and when I am thirsty I can milk my cow and drink the milk: and what
can I wish for more?’ When he came to an inn, he halted, ate up all his
bread, and gave away his last penny for a glass of beer. When he had
rested himself he set off again, driving his cow towards his mother’s
village. But the heat grew greater as soon as noon came on, till at
last, as he found himself on a wide heath that would take him more than
an hour to cross, he began to be so hot and parched that his tongue
clave to the roof of his mouth. ‘I can find a cure for this,’ thought
he; ‘now I will milk my cow and quench my thirst’: so he tied her to the
stump of a tree, and held his leathern cap to milk into; but not a drop
was to be had. Who would have thought that this cow, which was to bring
him milk and butter and cheese, was all that time utterly dry? Hans had
not thought of looking to that.

While he was trying his luck in milking, and managing the matter very
clumsily, the uneasy beast began to think him very troublesome; and at
last gave him such a kick on the head as knocked him down; and there he
lay a long while senseless. Luckily a butcher soon came by, driving a
pig in a wheelbarrow. ‘What is the matter with you, my man?’ said the
butcher, as he helped him up. Hans told him what had happened, how he
was dry, and wanted to milk his cow, but found the cow was dry too. Then
the butcher gave him a flask of ale, saying, ‘There, drink and refresh
yourself; your cow will give you no milk: don’t you see she is an old
beast, good for nothing but the slaughter-house?’ ‘Alas, alas!’ said
Hans, ‘who would have thought it? What a shame to take my horse, and
give me only a dry cow! If I kill her, what will she be good for? I hate
cow-beef; it is not tender enough for me. If it were a pig now--like
that fat gentleman you are driving along at his ease--one could do
something with it; it would at any rate make sausages.’ ‘Well,’ said
the butcher, ‘I don’t like to say no, when one is asked to do a kind,
neighbourly thing. To please you I will change, and give you my fine fat
pig for the cow.’ ‘Heaven reward you for your kindness and self-denial!’
said Hans, as he gave the butcher the cow; and taking the pig off the
wheel-barrow, drove it away, holding it by the string that was tied to
its leg.

So on he jogged, and all seemed now to go right with him: he had met
with some misfortunes, to be sure; but he was now well repaid for all.
How could it be otherwise with such a travelling companion as he had at
last got?

The next man he met was a countryman carrying a fine white goose. The
countryman stopped to ask what was o’clock; this led to further chat;
and Hans told him all his luck, how he had so many good bargains, and
how all the world went gay and smiling with him. The countryman then
began to tell his tale, and said he was going to take the goose to a
christening. ‘Feel,’ said he, ‘how heavy it is, and yet it is only eight
weeks old. Whoever roasts and eats it will find plenty of fat upon it,
it has lived so well!’ ‘You’re right,’ said Hans, as he weighed it in
his hand; ‘but if you talk of fat, my pig is no trifle.’ Meantime the
countryman began to look grave, and shook his head. ‘Hark ye!’ said he,
‘my worthy friend, you seem a good sort of fellow, so I can’t help doing
you a kind turn. Your pig may get you into a scrape. In the village I
just came from, the squire has had a pig stolen out of his sty. I was
dreadfully afraid when I saw you that you had got the squire’s pig. If
you have, and they catch you, it will be a bad job for you. The least
they will do will be to throw you into the horse-pond. Can you swim?’

Poor Hans was sadly frightened. ‘Good man,’ cried he, ‘pray get me out
of this scrape. I know nothing of where the pig was either bred or born;
but he may have been the squire’s for aught I can tell: you know this
country better than I do, take my pig and give me the goose.’ ‘I ought
to have something into the bargain,’ said the countryman; ‘give a fat
goose for a pig, indeed! ‘Tis not everyone would do so much for you as
that. However, I will not be hard upon you, as you are in trouble.’ Then
he took the string in his hand, and drove off the pig by a side path;
while Hans went on the way homewards free from care. ‘After all,’
thought he, ‘that chap is pretty well taken in. I don’t care whose pig
it is, but wherever it came from it has been a very good friend to me. I
have much the best of the bargain. First there will be a capital roast;
then the fat will find me in goose-grease for six months; and then there
are all the beautiful white feathers. I will put them into my pillow,
and then I am sure I shall sleep soundly without rocking. How happy my
mother will be! Talk of a pig, indeed! Give me a fine fat goose.’

As he came to the next village, he saw a scissor-grinder with his wheel,
working and singing,

 ‘O’er hill and o’er dale
  So happy I roam,
  Work light and live well,
  All the world is my home;
  Then who so blythe, so merry as I?’

Hans stood looking on for a while, and at last said, ‘You must be well
off, master grinder! you seem so happy at your work.’ ‘Yes,’ said the
other, ‘mine is a golden trade; a good grinder never puts his hand
into his pocket without finding money in it--but where did you get that
beautiful goose?’ ‘I did not buy it, I gave a pig for it.’ ‘And where
did you get the pig?’ ‘I gave a cow for it.’ ‘And the cow?’ ‘I gave a
horse for it.’ ‘And the horse?’ ‘I gave a lump of silver as big as my
head for it.’ ‘And the silver?’ ‘Oh! I worked hard for that seven long
years.’ ‘You have thriven well in the world hitherto,’ said the grinder,
‘now if you could find money in your pocket whenever you put your hand
in it, your fortune would be made.’ ‘Very true: but how is that to be
managed?’ ‘How? Why, you must turn grinder like myself,’ said the other;
‘you only want a grindstone; the rest will come of itself. Here is one
that is but little the worse for wear: I would not ask more than the
value of your goose for it--will you buy?’ ‘How can you ask?’ said
Hans; ‘I should be the happiest man in the world, if I could have money
whenever I put my hand in my pocket: what could I want more? there’s
the goose.’ ‘Now,’ said the grinder, as he gave him a common rough stone
that lay by his side, ‘this is a most capital stone; do but work it well
enough, and you can make an old nail cut with it.’

Hans took the stone, and went his way with a light heart: his eyes
sparkled for joy, and he said to himself, ‘Surely I must have been born
in a lucky hour; everything I could want or wish for comes of itself.
People are so kind; they seem really to think I do them a favour in
letting them make me rich, and giving me good bargains.’

Meantime he began to be tired, and hungry too, for he had given away his
last penny in his joy at getting the cow.

At last he could go no farther, for the stone tired him sadly: and he
dragged himself to the side of a river, that he might take a drink of
water, and rest a while. So he laid the stone carefully by his side on
the bank: but, as he stooped down to drink, he forgot it, pushed it a
little, and down it rolled, plump into the stream.

For a while he watched it sinking in the deep clear water; then sprang
up and danced for joy, and again fell upon his knees and thanked Heaven,
with tears in his eyes, for its kindness in taking away his only plague,
the ugly heavy stone.

‘How happy am I!’ cried he; ‘nobody was ever so lucky as I.’ Then up he
got with a light heart, free from all his troubles, and walked on till
he reached his mother’s house, and told her how very easy the road to
good luck was.




JORINDA AND JORINDEL

There was once an old castle, that stood in the middle of a deep gloomy
wood, and in the castle lived an old fairy. Now this fairy could take
any shape she pleased. All the day long she flew about in the form of
an owl, or crept about the country like a cat; but at night she always
became an old woman again. When any young man came within a hundred
paces of her castle, he became quite fixed, and could not move a step
till she came and set him free; which she would not do till he had given
her his word never to come there again: but when any pretty maiden came
within that space she was changed into a bird, and the fairy put her
into a cage, and hung her up in a chamber in the castle. There were
seven hundred of these cages hanging in the castle, and all with
beautiful birds in them.

Now there was once a maiden whose name was Jorinda. She was prettier
than all the pretty girls that ever were seen before, and a shepherd
lad, whose name was Jorindel, was very fond of her, and they were soon
to be married. One day they went to walk in the wood, that they might be
alone; and Jorindel said, ‘We must take care that we don’t go too near
to the fairy’s castle.’ It was a beautiful evening; the last rays of the
setting sun shone bright through the long stems of the trees upon
the green underwood beneath, and the turtle-doves sang from the tall
birches.

Jorinda sat down to gaze upon the sun; Jorindel sat by her side; and
both felt sad, they knew not why; but it seemed as if they were to be
parted from one another for ever. They had wandered a long way; and when
they looked to see which way they should go home, they found themselves
at a loss to know what path to take.

The sun was setting fast, and already half of its circle had sunk behind
the hill: Jorindel on a sudden looked behind him, and saw through the
bushes that they had, without knowing it, sat down close under the old
walls of the castle. Then he shrank for fear, turned pale, and trembled.
Jorinda was just singing,

 ‘The ring-dove sang from the willow spray,
  Well-a-day! Well-a-day!
  He mourn’d for the fate of his darling mate,
  Well-a-day!’

when her song stopped suddenly. Jorindel turned to see the reason, and
beheld his Jorinda changed into a nightingale, so that her song ended
with a mournful _jug, jug_. An owl with fiery eyes flew three times
round them, and three times screamed:

 ‘Tu whu! Tu whu! Tu whu!’

Jorindel could not move; he stood fixed as a stone, and could neither
weep, nor speak, nor stir hand or foot. And now the sun went quite down;
the gloomy night came; the owl flew into a bush; and a moment after the
old fairy came forth pale and meagre, with staring eyes, and a nose and
chin that almost met one another.

She mumbled something to herself, seized the nightingale, and went away
with it in her hand. Poor Jorindel saw the nightingale was gone--but
what could he do? He could not speak, he could not move from the spot
where he stood. At last the fairy came back and sang with a hoarse
voice:

 ‘Till the prisoner is fast,
  And her doom is cast,
  There stay! Oh, stay!
  When the charm is around her,
  And the spell has bound her,
  Hie away! away!’

On a sudden Jorindel found himself free. Then he fell on his knees
before the fairy, and prayed her to give him back his dear Jorinda: but
she laughed at him, and said he should never see her again; then she
went her way.

He prayed, he wept, he sorrowed, but all in vain. ‘Alas!’ he said, ‘what
will become of me?’ He could not go back to his own home, so he went to
a strange village, and employed himself in keeping sheep. Many a time
did he walk round and round as near to the hated castle as he dared go,
but all in vain; he heard or saw nothing of Jorinda.

At last he dreamt one night that he found a beautiful purple flower,
and that in the middle of it lay a costly pearl; and he dreamt that he
plucked the flower, and went with it in his hand into the castle, and
that everything he touched with it was disenchanted, and that there he
found his Jorinda again.

In the morning when he awoke, he began to search over hill and dale for
this pretty flower; and eight long days he sought for it in vain: but
on the ninth day, early in the morning, he found the beautiful purple
flower; and in the middle of it was a large dewdrop, as big as a costly
pearl. Then he plucked the flower, and set out and travelled day and
night, till he came again to the castle.

He walked nearer than a hundred paces to it, and yet he did not become
fixed as before, but found that he could go quite close up to the door.
Jorindel was very glad indeed to see this. Then he touched the door with
the flower, and it sprang open; so that he went in through the court,
and listened when he heard so many birds singing. At last he came to the
chamber where the fairy sat, with the seven hundred birds singing in
the seven hundred cages. When she saw Jorindel she was very angry, and
screamed with rage; but she could not come within two yards of him, for
the flower he held in his hand was his safeguard. He looked around at
the birds, but alas! there were many, many nightingales, and how then
should he find out which was his Jorinda? While he was thinking what to
do, he saw the fairy had taken down one of the cages, and was making the
best of her way off through the door. He ran or flew after her, touched
the cage with the flower, and Jorinda stood before him, and threw her
arms round his neck looking as beautiful as ever, as beautiful as when
they walked together in the wood.

Then he touched all the other birds with the flower, so that they all
took their old forms again; and he took Jorinda home, where they were
married, and lived happily together many years: and so did a good many
other lads, whose maidens had been forced to sing in the old fairy’s
cages by themselves, much longer than they liked.




THE TRAVELLING MUSICIANS

An honest farmer had once an ass that had been a faithful servant to him
a great many years, but was now growing old and every day more and more
unfit for work. His master therefore was tired of keeping him and
began to think of putting an end to him; but the ass, who saw that some
mischief was in the wind, took himself slyly off, and began his journey
towards the great city, ‘For there,’ thought he, ‘I may turn musician.’

After he had travelled a little way, he spied a dog lying by the
roadside and panting as if he were tired. ‘What makes you pant so, my
friend?’ said the ass. ‘Alas!’ said the dog, ‘my master was going to
knock me on the head, because I am old and weak, and can no longer make
myself useful to him in hunting; so I ran away; but what can I do to
earn my livelihood?’ ‘Hark ye!’ said the ass, ‘I am going to the great
city to turn musician: suppose you go with me, and try what you can
do in the same way?’ The dog said he was willing, and they jogged on
together.

They had not gone far before they saw a cat sitting in the middle of the
road and making a most rueful face. ‘Pray, my good lady,’ said the ass,
‘what’s the matter with you? You look quite out of spirits!’ ‘Ah, me!’
said the cat, ‘how can one be in good spirits when one’s life is in
danger? Because I am beginning to grow old, and had rather lie at my
ease by the fire than run about the house after the mice, my mistress
laid hold of me, and was going to drown me; and though I have been lucky
enough to get away from her, I do not know what I am to live upon.’
‘Oh,’ said the ass, ‘by all means go with us to the great city; you are
a good night singer, and may make your fortune as a musician.’ The cat
was pleased with the thought, and joined the party.

Soon afterwards, as they were passing by a farmyard, they saw a cock
perched upon a gate, and screaming out with all his might and main.
‘Bravo!’ said the ass; ‘upon my word, you make a famous noise; pray what
is all this about?’ ‘Why,’ said the cock, ‘I was just now saying that
we should have fine weather for our washing-day, and yet my mistress and
the cook don’t thank me for my pains, but threaten to cut off my
head tomorrow, and make broth of me for the guests that are coming
on Sunday!’ ‘Heaven forbid!’ said the ass, ‘come with us Master
Chanticleer; it will be better, at any rate, than staying here to have
your head cut off! Besides, who knows? If we care to sing in tune, we
may get up some kind of a concert; so come along with us.’ ‘With all my
heart,’ said the cock: so they all four went on jollily together.

They could not, however, reach the great city the first day; so when
night came on, they went into a wood to sleep. The ass and the dog laid
themselves down under a great tree, and the cat climbed up into the
branches; while the cock, thinking that the higher he sat the safer he
should be, flew up to the very top of the tree, and then, according to
his custom, before he went to sleep, looked out on all sides of him to
see that everything was well. In doing this, he saw afar off something
bright and shining and calling to his companions said, ‘There must be a
house no great way off, for I see a light.’ ‘If that be the case,’ said
the ass, ‘we had better change our quarters, for our lodging is not the
best in the world!’ ‘Besides,’ added the dog, ‘I should not be the
worse for a bone or two, or a bit of meat.’ So they walked off together
towards the spot where Chanticleer had seen the light, and as they drew
near it became larger and brighter, till they at last came close to a
house in which a gang of robbers lived.

The ass, being the tallest of the company, marched up to the window and
peeped in. ‘Well, Donkey,’ said Chanticleer, ‘what do you see?’ ‘What
do I see?’ replied the ass. ‘Why, I see a table spread with all kinds of
good things, and robbers sitting round it making merry.’ ‘That would
be a noble lodging for us,’ said the cock. ‘Yes,’ said the ass, ‘if we
could only get in’; so they consulted together how they should contrive
to get the robbers out; and at last they hit upon a plan. The ass placed
himself upright on his hind legs, with his forefeet resting against the
window; the dog got upon his back; the cat scrambled up to the dog’s
shoulders, and the cock flew up and sat upon the cat’s head. When
all was ready a signal was given, and they began their music. The ass
brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock screamed; and then
they all broke through the window at once, and came tumbling into
the room, amongst the broken glass, with a most hideous clatter! The
robbers, who had been not a little frightened by the opening concert,
had now no doubt that some frightful hobgoblin had broken in upon them,
and scampered away as fast as they could.

The coast once clear, our travellers soon sat down and dispatched what
the robbers had left, with as much eagerness as if they had not expected
to eat again for a month. As soon as they had satisfied themselves, they
put out the lights, and each once more sought out a resting-place to
his own liking. The donkey laid himself down upon a heap of straw in
the yard, the dog stretched himself upon a mat behind the door, the
cat rolled herself up on the hearth before the warm ashes, and the
cock perched upon a beam on the top of the house; and, as they were all
rather tired with their journey, they soon fell asleep.

But about midnight, when the robbers saw from afar that the lights were
out and that all seemed quiet, they began to think that they had been in
too great a hurry to run away; and one of them, who was bolder than
the rest, went to see what was going on. Finding everything still, he
marched into the kitchen, and groped about till he found a match in
order to light a candle; and then, espying the glittering fiery eyes of
the cat, he mistook them for live coals, and held the match to them to
light it. But the cat, not understanding this joke, sprang at his face,
and spat, and scratched at him. This frightened him dreadfully, and away
he ran to the back door; but there the dog jumped up and bit him in the
leg; and as he was crossing over the yard the ass kicked him; and the
cock, who had been awakened by the noise, crowed with all his might. At
this the robber ran back as fast as he could to his comrades, and told
the captain how a horrid witch had got into the house, and had spat at
him and scratched his face with her long bony fingers; how a man with a
knife in his hand had hidden himself behind the door, and stabbed him
in the leg; how a black monster stood in the yard and struck him with a
club, and how the devil had sat upon the top of the house and cried out,
‘Throw the rascal up here!’ After this the robbers never dared to go
back to the house; but the musicians were so pleased with their quarters
that they took up their abode there; and there they are, I dare say, at
this very day.




OLD SULTAN

A shepherd had a faithful dog, called Sultan, who was grown very old,
and had lost all his teeth. And one day when the shepherd and his wife
were standing together before the house the shepherd said, ‘I will shoot
old Sultan tomorrow morning, for he is of no use now.’ But his wife
said, ‘Pray let the poor faithful creature live; he has served us well a
great many years, and we ought to give him a livelihood for the rest of
his days.’ ‘But what can we do with him?’ said the shepherd, ‘he has not
a tooth in his head, and the thieves don’t care for him at all; to
be sure he has served us, but then he did it to earn his livelihood;
tomorrow shall be his last day, depend upon it.’

Poor Sultan, who was lying close by them, heard all that the shepherd
and his wife said to one another, and was very much frightened to think
tomorrow would be his last day; so in the evening he went to his good
friend the wolf, who lived in the wood, and told him all his sorrows,
and how his master meant to kill him in the morning. ‘Make yourself
easy,’ said the wolf, ‘I will give you some good advice. Your master,
you know, goes out every morning very early with his wife into the
field; and they take their little child with them, and lay it down
behind the hedge in the shade while they are at work. Now do you lie
down close by the child, and pretend to be watching it, and I will come
out of the wood and run away with it; you must run after me as fast as
you can, and I will let it drop; then you may carry it back, and they
will think you have saved their child, and will be so thankful to you
that they will take care of you as long as you live.’ The dog liked this
plan very well; and accordingly so it was managed. The wolf ran with the
child a little way; the shepherd and his wife screamed out; but Sultan
soon overtook him, and carried the poor little thing back to his master
and mistress. Then the shepherd patted him on the head, and said, ‘Old
Sultan has saved our child from the wolf, and therefore he shall live
and be well taken care of, and have plenty to eat. Wife, go home, and
give him a good dinner, and let him have my old cushion to sleep on
as long as he lives.’ So from this time forward Sultan had all that he
could wish for.

Soon afterwards the wolf came and wished him joy, and said, ‘Now, my
good fellow, you must tell no tales, but turn your head the other way
when I want to taste one of the old shepherd’s fine fat sheep.’ ‘No,’
said the Sultan; ‘I will be true to my master.’ However, the wolf
thought he was in joke, and came one night to get a dainty morsel. But
Sultan had told his master what the wolf meant to do; so he laid wait
for him behind the barn door, and when the wolf was busy looking out for
a good fat sheep, he had a stout cudgel laid about his back, that combed
his locks for him finely.

Then the wolf was very angry, and called Sultan ‘an old rogue,’ and
swore he would have his revenge. So the next morning the wolf sent the
boar to challenge Sultan to come into the wood to fight the matter. Now
Sultan had nobody he could ask to be his second but the shepherd’s old
three-legged cat; so he took her with him, and as the poor thing limped
along with some trouble, she stuck up her tail straight in the air.

The wolf and the wild boar were first on the ground; and when they
espied their enemies coming, and saw the cat’s long tail standing
straight in the air, they thought she was carrying a sword for Sultan to
fight with; and every time she limped, they thought she was picking up
a stone to throw at them; so they said they should not like this way of
fighting, and the boar lay down behind a bush, and the wolf jumped
up into a tree. Sultan and the cat soon came up, and looked about and
wondered that no one was there. The boar, however, had not quite hidden
himself, for his ears stuck out of the bush; and when he shook one of
them a little, the cat, seeing something move, and thinking it was a
mouse, sprang upon it, and bit and scratched it, so that the boar jumped
up and grunted, and ran away, roaring out, ‘Look up in the tree, there
sits the one who is to blame.’ So they looked up, and espied the wolf
sitting amongst the branches; and they called him a cowardly rascal,
and would not suffer him to come down till he was heartily ashamed of
himself, and had promised to be good friends again with old Sultan.




THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND THE BEAN

In a village dwelt a poor old woman, who had gathered together a dish
of beans and wanted to cook them. So she made a fire on her hearth, and
that it might burn the quicker, she lighted it with a handful of straw.
When she was emptying the beans into the pan, one dropped without her
observing it, and lay on the ground beside a straw, and soon afterwards
a burning coal from the fire leapt down to the two. Then the straw
began and said: ‘Dear friends, from whence do you come here?’ The coal
replied: ‘I fortunately sprang out of the fire, and if I had not escaped
by sheer force, my death would have been certain,--I should have been
burnt to ashes.’ The bean said: ‘I too have escaped with a whole skin,
but if the old woman had got me into the pan, I should have been made
into broth without any mercy, like my comrades.’ ‘And would a better
fate have fallen to my lot?’ said the straw. ‘The old woman has
destroyed all my brethren in fire and smoke; she seized sixty of them at
once, and took their lives. I luckily slipped through her fingers.’

‘But what are we to do now?’ said the coal.

‘I think,’ answered the bean, ‘that as we have so fortunately escaped
death, we should keep together like good companions, and lest a new
mischance should overtake us here, we should go away together, and
repair to a foreign country.’

The proposition pleased the two others, and they set out on their way
together. Soon, however, they came to a little brook, and as there was
no bridge or foot-plank, they did not know how they were to get over
it. The straw hit on a good idea, and said: ‘I will lay myself straight
across, and then you can walk over on me as on a bridge.’ The straw
therefore stretched itself from one bank to the other, and the coal,
who was of an impetuous disposition, tripped quite boldly on to the
newly-built bridge. But when she had reached the middle, and heard the
water rushing beneath her, she was after all, afraid, and stood still,
and ventured no farther. The straw, however, began to burn, broke in
two pieces, and fell into the stream. The coal slipped after her, hissed
when she got into the water, and breathed her last. The bean, who had
prudently stayed behind on the shore, could not but laugh at the event,
was unable to stop, and laughed so heartily that she burst. It would
have been all over with her, likewise, if, by good fortune, a tailor who
was travelling in search of work, had not sat down to rest by the brook.
As he had a compassionate heart he pulled out his needle and thread,
and sewed her together. The bean thanked him most prettily, but as the
tailor used black thread, all beans since then have a black seam.




BRIAR ROSE

A king and queen once upon a time reigned in a country a great way off,
where there were in those days fairies. Now this king and queen had
plenty of money, and plenty of fine clothes to wear, and plenty of
good things to eat and drink, and a coach to ride out in every day: but
though they had been married many years they had no children, and this
grieved them very much indeed. But one day as the queen was walking
by the side of the river, at the bottom of the garden, she saw a poor
little fish, that had thrown itself out of the water, and lay gasping
and nearly dead on the bank. Then the queen took pity on the little
fish, and threw it back again into the river; and before it swam away
it lifted its head out of the water and said, ‘I know what your wish is,
and it shall be fulfilled, in return for your kindness to me--you will
soon have a daughter.’ What the little fish had foretold soon came to
pass; and the queen had a little girl, so very beautiful that the king
could not cease looking on it for joy, and said he would hold a great
feast and make merry, and show the child to all the land. So he asked
his kinsmen, and nobles, and friends, and neighbours. But the queen
said, ‘I will have the fairies also, that they might be kind and good
to our little daughter.’ Now there were thirteen fairies in the kingdom;
but as the king and queen had only twelve golden dishes for them to eat
out of, they were forced to leave one of the fairies without asking her.
So twelve fairies came, each with a high red cap on her head, and red
shoes with high heels on her feet, and a long white wand in her hand:
and after the feast was over they gathered round in a ring and gave all
their best gifts to the little princess. One gave her goodness, another
beauty, another riches, and so on till she had all that was good in the
world.

Just as eleven of them had done blessing her, a great noise was heard in
the courtyard, and word was brought that the thirteenth fairy was
come, with a black cap on her head, and black shoes on her feet, and a
broomstick in her hand: and presently up she came into the dining-hall.
Now, as she had not been asked to the feast she was very angry, and
scolded the king and queen very much, and set to work to take her
revenge. So she cried out, ‘The king’s daughter shall, in her fifteenth
year, be wounded by a spindle, and fall down dead.’ Then the twelfth of
the friendly fairies, who had not yet given her gift, came forward, and
said that the evil wish must be fulfilled, but that she could soften its
mischief; so her gift was, that the king’s daughter, when the spindle
wounded her, should not really die, but should only fall asleep for a
hundred years.

However, the king hoped still to save his dear child altogether from
the threatened evil; so he ordered that all the spindles in the kingdom
should be bought up and burnt. But all the gifts of the first eleven
fairies were in the meantime fulfilled; for the princess was so
beautiful, and well behaved, and good, and wise, that everyone who knew
her loved her.

It happened that, on the very day she was fifteen years old, the king
and queen were not at home, and she was left alone in the palace. So she
roved about by herself, and looked at all the rooms and chambers, till
at last she came to an old tower, to which there was a narrow staircase
ending with a little door. In the door there was a golden key, and when
she turned it the door sprang open, and there sat an old lady spinning
away very busily. ‘Why, how now, good mother,’ said the princess; ‘what
are you doing there?’ ‘Spinning,’ said the old lady, and nodded her
head, humming a tune, while buzz! went the wheel. ‘How prettily that
little thing turns round!’ said the princess, and took the spindle
and began to try and spin. But scarcely had she touched it, before the
fairy’s prophecy was fulfilled; the spindle wounded her, and she fell
down lifeless on the ground.

However, she was not dead, but had only fallen into a deep sleep; and
the king and the queen, who had just come home, and all their court,
fell asleep too; and the horses slept in the stables, and the dogs in
the court, the pigeons on the house-top, and the very flies slept upon
the walls. Even the fire on the hearth left off blazing, and went to
sleep; the jack stopped, and the spit that was turning about with a
goose upon it for the king’s dinner stood still; and the cook, who was
at that moment pulling the kitchen-boy by the hair to give him a box
on the ear for something he had done amiss, let him go, and both fell
asleep; the butler, who was slyly tasting the ale, fell asleep with the
jug at his lips: and thus everything stood still, and slept soundly.

A large hedge of thorns soon grew round the palace, and every year it
became higher and thicker; till at last the old palace was surrounded
and hidden, so that not even the roof or the chimneys could be seen. But
there went a report through all the land of the beautiful sleeping Briar
Rose (for so the king’s daughter was called): so that, from time to
time, several kings’ sons came, and tried to break through the thicket
into the palace. This, however, none of them could ever do; for the
thorns and bushes laid hold of them, as it were with hands; and there
they stuck fast, and died wretchedly.

After many, many years there came a king’s son into that land: and an
old man told him the story of the thicket of thorns; and how a beautiful
palace stood behind it, and how a wonderful princess, called Briar Rose,
lay in it asleep, with all her court. He told, too, how he had heard
from his grandfather that many, many princes had come, and had tried to
break through the thicket, but that they had all stuck fast in it, and
died. Then the young prince said, ‘All this shall not frighten me; I
will go and see this Briar Rose.’ The old man tried to hinder him, but
he was bent upon going.

Now that very day the hundred years were ended; and as the prince came
to the thicket he saw nothing but beautiful flowering shrubs, through
which he went with ease, and they shut in after him as thick as ever.
Then he came at last to the palace, and there in the court lay the dogs
asleep; and the horses were standing in the stables; and on the roof sat
the pigeons fast asleep, with their heads under their wings. And when he
came into the palace, the flies were sleeping on the walls; the spit
was standing still; the butler had the jug of ale at his lips, going
to drink a draught; the maid sat with a fowl in her lap ready to be
plucked; and the cook in the kitchen was still holding up her hand, as
if she was going to beat the boy.

Then he went on still farther, and all was so still that he could hear
every breath he drew; till at last he came to the old tower, and opened
the door of the little room in which Briar Rose was; and there she lay,
fast asleep on a couch by the window. She looked so beautiful that he
could not take his eyes off her, so he stooped down and gave her a kiss.
But the moment he kissed her she opened her eyes and awoke, and smiled
upon him; and they went out together; and soon the king and queen also
awoke, and all the court, and gazed on each other with great wonder.
And the horses shook themselves, and the dogs jumped up and barked; the
pigeons took their heads from under their wings, and looked about and
flew into the fields; the flies on the walls buzzed again; the fire in
the kitchen blazed up; round went the jack, and round went the spit,
with the goose for the king’s dinner upon it; the butler finished his
draught of ale; the maid went on plucking the fowl; and the cook gave
the boy the box on his ear.

And then the prince and Briar Rose were married, and the wedding feast
was given; and they lived happily together all their lives long.




THE DOG AND THE SPARROW

A shepherd’s dog had a master who took no care of him, but often let him
suffer the greatest hunger. At last he could bear it no longer; so he
took to his heels, and off he ran in a very sad and sorrowful mood.
On the road he met a sparrow that said to him, ‘Why are you so sad,
my friend?’ ‘Because,’ said the dog, ‘I am very very hungry, and have
nothing to eat.’ ‘If that be all,’ answered the sparrow, ‘come with me
into the next town, and I will soon find you plenty of food.’ So on they
went together into the town: and as they passed by a butcher’s shop,
the sparrow said to the dog, ‘Stand there a little while till I peck you
down a piece of meat.’ So the sparrow perched upon the shelf: and having
first looked carefully about her to see if anyone was watching her, she
pecked and scratched at a steak that lay upon the edge of the shelf,
till at last down it fell. Then the dog snapped it up, and scrambled
away with it into a corner, where he soon ate it all up. ‘Well,’ said
the sparrow, ‘you shall have some more if you will; so come with me to
the next shop, and I will peck you down another steak.’ When the dog had
eaten this too, the sparrow said to him, ‘Well, my good friend, have you
had enough now?’ ‘I have had plenty of meat,’ answered he, ‘but I should
like to have a piece of bread to eat after it.’ ‘Come with me then,’
said the sparrow, ‘and you shall soon have that too.’ So she took him
to a baker’s shop, and pecked at two rolls that lay in the window, till
they fell down: and as the dog still wished for more, she took him to
another shop and pecked down some more for him. When that was eaten, the
sparrow asked him whether he had had enough now. ‘Yes,’ said he; ‘and
now let us take a walk a little way out of the town.’ So they both went
out upon the high road; but as the weather was warm, they had not gone
far before the dog said, ‘I am very much tired--I should like to take a
nap.’ ‘Very well,’ answered the sparrow, ‘do so, and in the meantime
I will perch upon that bush.’ So the dog stretched himself out on the
road, and fell fast asleep. Whilst he slept, there came by a carter with
a cart drawn by three horses, and loaded with two casks of wine. The
sparrow, seeing that the carter did not turn out of the way, but would
go on in the track in which the dog lay, so as to drive over him, called
out, ‘Stop! stop! Mr Carter, or it shall be the worse for you.’ But the
carter, grumbling to himself, ‘You make it the worse for me, indeed!
what can you do?’ cracked his whip, and drove his cart over the poor
dog, so that the wheels crushed him to death. ‘There,’ cried the
sparrow, ‘thou cruel villain, thou hast killed my friend the dog. Now
mind what I say. This deed of thine shall cost thee all thou art worth.’
‘Do your worst, and welcome,’ said the brute, ‘what harm can you do me?’
and passed on. But the sparrow crept under the tilt of the cart, and
pecked at the bung of one of the casks till she loosened it; and then
all the wine ran out, without the carter seeing it. At last he looked
round, and saw that the cart was dripping, and the cask quite empty.
‘What an unlucky wretch I am!’ cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said
the sparrow, as she alighted upon the head of one of the horses, and
pecked at him till he reared up and kicked. When the carter saw this,
he drew out his hatchet and aimed a blow at the sparrow, meaning to kill
her; but she flew away, and the blow fell upon the poor horse’s head
with such force, that he fell down dead. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’
cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the sparrow. And as the carter
went on with the other two horses, she again crept under the tilt of the
cart, and pecked out the bung of the second cask, so that all the wine
ran out. When the carter saw this, he again cried out, ‘Miserable wretch
that I am!’ But the sparrow answered, ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ and
perched on the head of the second horse, and pecked at him too. The
carter ran up and struck at her again with his hatchet; but away she
flew, and the blow fell upon the second horse and killed him on the
spot. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’ said he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said
the sparrow; and perching upon the third horse, she began to peck him
too. The carter was mad with fury; and without looking about him, or
caring what he was about, struck again at the sparrow; but killed his
third horse as he done the other two. ‘Alas! miserable wretch that I
am!’ cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ answered the sparrow as she flew
away; ‘now will I plague and punish thee at thy own house.’ The
carter was forced at last to leave his cart behind him, and to go home
overflowing with rage and vexation. ‘Alas!’ said he to his wife, ‘what
ill luck has befallen me!--my wine is all spilt, and my horses all three
dead.’ ‘Alas! husband,’ replied she, ‘and a wicked bird has come into
the house, and has brought with her all the birds in the world, I am
sure, and they have fallen upon our corn in the loft, and are eating it
up at such a rate!’ Away ran the husband upstairs, and saw thousands of
birds sitting upon the floor eating up his corn, with the sparrow in the
midst of them. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’ cried the carter; for he saw
that the corn was almost all gone. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the
sparrow; ‘thy cruelty shall cost thee thy life yet!’ and away she flew.

The carter seeing that he had thus lost all that he had, went down
into his kitchen; and was still not sorry for what he had done, but sat
himself angrily and sulkily in the chimney corner. But the sparrow sat
on the outside of the window, and cried ‘Carter! thy cruelty shall cost
thee thy life!’ With that he jumped up in a rage, seized his hatchet,
and threw it at the sparrow; but it missed her, and only broke the
window. The sparrow now hopped in, perched upon the window-seat, and
cried, ‘Carter! it shall cost thee thy life!’ Then he became mad and
blind with rage, and struck the window-seat with such force that he
cleft it in two: and as the sparrow flew from place to place, the carter
and his wife were so furious, that they broke all their furniture,
glasses, chairs, benches, the table, and at last the walls, without
touching the bird at all. In the end, however, they caught her: and the
wife said, ‘Shall I kill her at once?’ ‘No,’ cried he, ‘that is letting
her off too easily: she shall die a much more cruel death; I will eat
her.’ But the sparrow began to flutter about, and stretch out her neck
and cried, ‘Carter! it shall cost thee thy life yet!’ With that he
could wait no longer: so he gave his wife the hatchet, and cried, ‘Wife,
strike at the bird and kill her in my hand.’ And the wife struck; but
she missed her aim, and hit her husband on the head so that he fell down
dead, and the sparrow flew quietly home to her nest.




THE TWELVE DANCING PRINCESSES

There was a king who had twelve beautiful daughters. They slept in
twelve beds all in one room; and when they went to bed, the doors were
shut and locked up; but every morning their shoes were found to be quite
worn through as if they had been danced in all night; and yet nobody
could find out how it happened, or where they had been.

Then the king made it known to all the land, that if any person could
discover the secret, and find out where it was that the princesses
danced in the night, he should have the one he liked best for his
wife, and should be king after his death; but whoever tried and did not
succeed, after three days and nights, should be put to death.

A king’s son soon came. He was well entertained, and in the evening was
taken to the chamber next to the one where the princesses lay in their
twelve beds. There he was to sit and watch where they went to dance;
and, in order that nothing might pass without his hearing it, the door
of his chamber was left open. But the king’s son soon fell asleep; and
when he awoke in the morning he found that the princesses had all been
dancing, for the soles of their shoes were full of holes. The same thing
happened the second and third night: so the king ordered his head to be
cut off. After him came several others; but they had all the same luck,
and all lost their lives in the same manner.

Now it chanced that an old soldier, who had been wounded in battle
and could fight no longer, passed through the country where this king
reigned: and as he was travelling through a wood, he met an old woman,
who asked him where he was going. ‘I hardly know where I am going, or
what I had better do,’ said the soldier; ‘but I think I should like very
well to find out where it is that the princesses dance, and then in time
I might be a king.’ ‘Well,’ said the old dame, ‘that is no very hard
task: only take care not to drink any of the wine which one of the
princesses will bring to you in the evening; and as soon as she leaves
you pretend to be fast asleep.’

Then she gave him a cloak, and said, ‘As soon as you put that on
you will become invisible, and you will then be able to follow the
princesses wherever they go.’ When the soldier heard all this good
counsel, he determined to try his luck: so he went to the king, and said
he was willing to undertake the task.

He was as well received as the others had been, and the king ordered
fine royal robes to be given him; and when the evening came he was led
to the outer chamber. Just as he was going to lie down, the eldest of
the princesses brought him a cup of wine; but the soldier threw it all
away secretly, taking care not to drink a drop. Then he laid himself
down on his bed, and in a little while began to snore very loud as if
he was fast asleep. When the twelve princesses heard this they laughed
heartily; and the eldest said, ‘This fellow too might have done a wiser
thing than lose his life in this way!’ Then they rose up and opened
their drawers and boxes, and took out all their fine clothes, and
dressed themselves at the glass, and skipped about as if they were eager
to begin dancing. But the youngest said, ‘I don’t know how it is, while
you are so happy I feel very uneasy; I am sure some mischance will
befall us.’ ‘You simpleton,’ said the eldest, ‘you are always afraid;
have you forgotten how many kings’ sons have already watched in vain?
And as for this soldier, even if I had not given him his sleeping
draught, he would have slept soundly enough.’

When they were all ready, they went and looked at the soldier; but he
snored on, and did not stir hand or foot: so they thought they were
quite safe; and the eldest went up to her own bed and clapped her hands,
and the bed sank into the floor and a trap-door flew open. The soldier
saw them going down through the trap-door one after another, the eldest
leading the way; and thinking he had no time to lose, he jumped up, put
on the cloak which the old woman had given him, and followed them;
but in the middle of the stairs he trod on the gown of the youngest
princess, and she cried out to her sisters, ‘All is not right; someone
took hold of my gown.’ ‘You silly creature!’ said the eldest, ‘it is
nothing but a nail in the wall.’ Then down they all went, and at the
bottom they found themselves in a most delightful grove of trees; and
the leaves were all of silver, and glittered and sparkled beautifully.
The soldier wished to take away some token of the place; so he broke
off a little branch, and there came a loud noise from the tree. Then the
youngest daughter said again, ‘I am sure all is not right--did not you
hear that noise? That never happened before.’ But the eldest said, ‘It
is only our princes, who are shouting for joy at our approach.’

Then they came to another grove of trees, where all the leaves were of
gold; and afterwards to a third, where the leaves were all glittering
diamonds. And the soldier broke a branch from each; and every time there
was a loud noise, which made the youngest sister tremble with fear; but
the eldest still said, it was only the princes, who were crying for joy.
So they went on till they came to a great lake; and at the side of the
lake there lay twelve little boats with twelve handsome princes in them,
who seemed to be waiting there for the princesses.

One of the princesses went into each boat, and the soldier stepped into
the same boat with the youngest. As they were rowing over the lake, the
prince who was in the boat with the youngest princess and the soldier
said, ‘I do not know why it is, but though I am rowing with all my might
we do not get on so fast as usual, and I am quite tired: the boat
seems very heavy today.’ ‘It is only the heat of the weather,’ said the
princess: ‘I feel it very warm too.’

On the other side of the lake stood a fine illuminated castle, from
which came the merry music of horns and trumpets. There they all landed,
and went into the castle, and each prince danced with his princess; and
the soldier, who was all the time invisible, danced with them too; and
when any of the princesses had a cup of wine set by her, he drank it
all up, so that when she put the cup to her mouth it was empty. At this,
too, the youngest sister was terribly frightened, but the eldest always
silenced her. They danced on till three o’clock in the morning, and then
all their shoes were worn out, so that they were obliged to leave off.
The princes rowed them back again over the lake (but this time the
soldier placed himself in the boat with the eldest princess); and on the
opposite shore they took leave of each other, the princesses promising
to come again the next night.

When they came to the stairs, the soldier ran on before the princesses,
and laid himself down; and as the twelve sisters slowly came up very
much tired, they heard him snoring in his bed; so they said, ‘Now all
is quite safe’; then they undressed themselves, put away their fine
clothes, pulled off their shoes, and went to bed. In the morning the
soldier said nothing about what had happened, but determined to see more
of this strange adventure, and went again the second and third night;
and every thing happened just as before; the princesses danced each time
till their shoes were worn to pieces, and then returned home. However,
on the third night the soldier carried away one of the golden cups as a
token of where he had been.

As soon as the time came when he was to declare the secret, he was taken
before the king with the three branches and the golden cup; and the
twelve princesses stood listening behind the door to hear what he would
say. And when the king asked him. ‘Where do my twelve daughters dance at
night?’ he answered, ‘With twelve princes in a castle under ground.’ And
then he told the king all that had happened, and showed him the three
branches and the golden cup which he had brought with him. Then the king
called for the princesses, and asked them whether what the soldier said
was true: and when they saw that they were discovered, and that it was
of no use to deny what had happened, they confessed it all. And the king
asked the soldier which of them he would choose for his wife; and he
answered, ‘I am not very young, so I will have the eldest.’--And they
were married that very day, and the soldier was chosen to be the king’s
heir.




THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE

There was once a fisherman who lived with his wife in a pigsty, close
by the seaside. The fisherman used to go out all day long a-fishing; and
one day, as he sat on the shore with his rod, looking at the sparkling
waves and watching his line, all on a sudden his float was dragged away
deep into the water: and in drawing it up he pulled out a great fish.
But the fish said, ‘Pray let me live! I am not a real fish; I am an
enchanted prince: put me in the water again, and let me go!’ ‘Oh, ho!’
said the man, ‘you need not make so many words about the matter; I will
have nothing to do with a fish that can talk: so swim away, sir, as soon
as you please!’ Then he put him back into the water, and the fish darted
straight down to the bottom, and left a long streak of blood behind him
on the wave.

When the fisherman went home to his wife in the pigsty, he told her how
he had caught a great fish, and how it had told him it was an enchanted
prince, and how, on hearing it speak, he had let it go again. ‘Did not
you ask it for anything?’ said the wife, ‘we live very wretchedly here,
in this nasty dirty pigsty; do go back and tell the fish we want a snug
little cottage.’

The fisherman did not much like the business: however, he went to the
seashore; and when he came back there the water looked all yellow and
green. And he stood at the water’s edge, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

Then the fish came swimming to him, and said, ‘Well, what is her will?
What does your wife want?’ ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘she says that when
I had caught you, I ought to have asked you for something before I let
you go; she does not like living any longer in the pigsty, and wants
a snug little cottage.’ ‘Go home, then,’ said the fish; ‘she is in the
cottage already!’ So the man went home, and saw his wife standing at the
door of a nice trim little cottage. ‘Come in, come in!’ said she; ‘is
not this much better than the filthy pigsty we had?’ And there was a
parlour, and a bedchamber, and a kitchen; and behind the cottage there
was a little garden, planted with all sorts of flowers and fruits; and
there was a courtyard behind, full of ducks and chickens. ‘Ah!’ said the
fisherman, ‘how happily we shall live now!’ ‘We will try to do so, at
least,’ said his wife.

Everything went right for a week or two, and then Dame Ilsabill said,
‘Husband, there is not near room enough for us in this cottage; the
courtyard and the garden are a great deal too small; I should like to
have a large stone castle to live in: go to the fish again and tell him
to give us a castle.’ ‘Wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘I don’t like to go to
him again, for perhaps he will be angry; we ought to be easy with this
pretty cottage to live in.’ ‘Nonsense!’ said the wife; ‘he will do it
very willingly, I know; go along and try!’

The fisherman went, but his heart was very heavy: and when he came to
the sea, it looked blue and gloomy, though it was very calm; and he went
close to the edge of the waves, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘Well, what does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the man,
dolefully, ‘my wife wants to live in a stone castle.’ ‘Go home, then,’
said the fish; ‘she is standing at the gate of it already.’ So away went
the fisherman, and found his wife standing before the gate of a great
castle. ‘See,’ said she, ‘is not this grand?’ With that they went into
the castle together, and found a great many servants there, and the
rooms all richly furnished, and full of golden chairs and tables; and
behind the castle was a garden, and around it was a park half a
mile long, full of sheep, and goats, and hares, and deer; and in the
courtyard were stables and cow-houses. ‘Well,’ said the man, ‘now we
will live cheerful and happy in this beautiful castle for the rest of
our lives.’ ‘Perhaps we may,’ said the wife; ‘but let us sleep upon it,
before we make up our minds to that.’ So they went to bed.

The next morning when Dame Ilsabill awoke it was broad daylight, and
she jogged the fisherman with her elbow, and said, ‘Get up, husband,
and bestir yourself, for we must be king of all the land.’ ‘Wife, wife,’
said the man, ‘why should we wish to be the king? I will not be king.’
‘Then I will,’ said she. ‘But, wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘how can you
be king--the fish cannot make you a king?’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘say
no more about it, but go and try! I will be king.’ So the man went away
quite sorrowful to think that his wife should want to be king. This time
the sea looked a dark grey colour, and was overspread with curling waves
and the ridges of foam as he cried out:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘Well, what would she have now?’ said the fish. ‘Alas!’ said the poor
man, ‘my wife wants to be king.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is king
already.’

Then the fisherman went home; and as he came close to the palace he saw
a troop of soldiers, and heard the sound of drums and trumpets. And when
he went in he saw his wife sitting on a throne of gold and diamonds,
with a golden crown upon her head; and on each side of her stood six
fair maidens, each a head taller than the other. ‘Well, wife,’ said the
fisherman, ‘are you king?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am king.’ And when he had
looked at her for a long time, he said, ‘Ah, wife! what a fine thing it
is to be king! Now we shall never have anything more to wish for as long
as we live.’ ‘I don’t know how that may be,’ said she; ‘never is a long
time. I am king, it is true; but I begin to be tired of that, and I
think I should like to be emperor.’ ‘Alas, wife! why should you wish to
be emperor?’ said the fisherman. ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘go to the fish!
I say I will be emperor.’ ‘Ah, wife!’ replied the fisherman, ‘the fish
cannot make an emperor, I am sure, and I should not like to ask him for
such a thing.’ ‘I am king,’ said Ilsabill, ‘and you are my slave; so go
at once!’

So the fisherman was forced to go; and he muttered as he went along,
‘This will come to no good, it is too much to ask; the fish will be
tired at last, and then we shall be sorry for what we have done.’ He
soon came to the seashore; and the water was quite black and muddy, and
a mighty whirlwind blew over the waves and rolled them about, but he
went as near as he could to the water’s brink, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What would she have now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman,
‘she wants to be emperor.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is emperor
already.’

So he went home again; and as he came near he saw his wife Ilsabill
sitting on a very lofty throne made of solid gold, with a great crown on
her head full two yards high; and on each side of her stood her guards
and attendants in a row, each one smaller than the other, from the
tallest giant down to a little dwarf no bigger than my finger. And
before her stood princes, and dukes, and earls: and the fisherman went
up to her and said, ‘Wife, are you emperor?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am
emperor.’ ‘Ah!’ said the man, as he gazed upon her, ‘what a fine thing
it is to be emperor!’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘why should we stop at being
emperor? I will be pope next.’ ‘O wife, wife!’ said he, ‘how can you be
pope? there is but one pope at a time in Christendom.’ ‘Husband,’ said
she, ‘I will be pope this very day.’ ‘But,’ replied the husband, ‘the
fish cannot make you pope.’ ‘What nonsense!’ said she; ‘if he can make
an emperor, he can make a pope: go and try him.’

So the fisherman went. But when he came to the shore the wind was raging
and the sea was tossed up and down in boiling waves, and the ships were
in trouble, and rolled fearfully upon the tops of the billows. In the
middle of the heavens there was a little piece of blue sky, but towards
the south all was red, as if a dreadful storm was rising. At this sight
the fisherman was dreadfully frightened, and he trembled so that his
knees knocked together: but still he went down near to the shore, and
said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘my
wife wants to be pope.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is pope already.’

Then the fisherman went home, and found Ilsabill sitting on a throne
that was two miles high. And she had three great crowns on her head, and
around her stood all the pomp and power of the Church. And on each side
of her were two rows of burning lights, of all sizes, the greatest as
large as the highest and biggest tower in the world, and the least no
larger than a small rushlight. ‘Wife,’ said the fisherman, as he looked
at all this greatness, ‘are you pope?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am pope.’
‘Well, wife,’ replied he, ‘it is a grand thing to be pope; and now
you must be easy, for you can be nothing greater.’ ‘I will think about
that,’ said the wife. Then they went to bed: but Dame Ilsabill could not
sleep all night for thinking what she should be next. At last, as she
was dropping asleep, morning broke, and the sun rose. ‘Ha!’ thought she,
as she woke up and looked at it through the window, ‘after all I cannot
prevent the sun rising.’ At this thought she was very angry, and wakened
her husband, and said, ‘Husband, go to the fish and tell him I must
be lord of the sun and moon.’ The fisherman was half asleep, but the
thought frightened him so much that he started and fell out of bed.
‘Alas, wife!’ said he, ‘cannot you be easy with being pope?’ ‘No,’
said she, ‘I am very uneasy as long as the sun and moon rise without my
leave. Go to the fish at once!’

Then the man went shivering with fear; and as he was going down to
the shore a dreadful storm arose, so that the trees and the very rocks
shook. And all the heavens became black with stormy clouds, and the
lightnings played, and the thunders rolled; and you might have seen in
the sea great black waves, swelling up like mountains with crowns of
white foam upon their heads. And the fisherman crept towards the sea,
and cried out, as well as he could:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said he, ‘she wants to
be lord of the sun and moon.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish, ‘to your pigsty
again.’

And there they live to this very day.




THE WILLOW-WREN AND THE BEAR

Once in summer-time the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest,
and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said: ‘Brother
wolf, what bird is it that sings so well?’ ‘That is the King of birds,’
said the wolf, ‘before whom we must bow down.’ In reality the bird was
the willow-wren. ‘IF that’s the case,’ said the bear, ‘I should very
much like to see his royal palace; come, take me thither.’ ‘That is not
done quite as you seem to think,’ said the wolf; ‘you must wait until
the Queen comes,’ Soon afterwards, the Queen arrived with some food in
her beak, and the lord King came too, and they began to feed their young
ones. The bear would have liked to go at once, but the wolf held him
back by the sleeve, and said: ‘No, you must wait until the lord and lady
Queen have gone away again.’ So they took stock of the hole where the
nest lay, and trotted away. The bear, however, could not rest until he
had seen the royal palace, and when a short time had passed, went to it
again. The King and Queen had just flown out, so he peeped in and saw
five or six young ones lying there. ‘Is that the royal palace?’ cried
the bear; ‘it is a wretched palace, and you are not King’s children, you
are disreputable children!’ When the young wrens heard that, they were
frightfully angry, and screamed: ‘No, that we are not! Our parents are
honest people! Bear, you will have to pay for that!’

The bear and the wolf grew uneasy, and turned back and went into their
holes. The young willow-wrens, however, continued to cry and scream, and
when their parents again brought food they said: ‘We will not so much as
touch one fly’s leg, no, not if we were dying of hunger, until you have
settled whether we are respectable children or not; the bear has been
here and has insulted us!’ Then the old King said: ‘Be easy, he shall
be punished,’ and he at once flew with the Queen to the bear’s cave, and
called in: ‘Old Growler, why have you insulted my children? You shall
suffer for it--we will punish you by a bloody war.’ Thus war was
announced to the Bear, and all four-footed animals were summoned to take
part in it, oxen, asses, cows, deer, and every other animal the earth
contained. And the willow-wren summoned everything which flew in the
air, not only birds, large and small, but midges, and hornets, bees and
flies had to come.

When the time came for the war to begin, the willow-wren sent out spies
to discover who was the enemy’s commander-in-chief. The gnat, who was
the most crafty, flew into the forest where the enemy was assembled,
and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where the password was to be
announced. There stood the bear, and he called the fox before him
and said: ‘Fox, you are the most cunning of all animals, you shall be
general and lead us.’ ‘Good,’ said the fox, ‘but what signal shall we
agree upon?’ No one knew that, so the fox said: ‘I have a fine long
bushy tail, which almost looks like a plume of red feathers. When I lift
my tail up quite high, all is going well, and you must charge; but if I
let it hang down, run away as fast as you can.’ When the gnat had heard
that, she flew away again, and revealed everything, down to the minutest
detail, to the willow-wren. When day broke, and the battle was to begin,
all the four-footed animals came running up with such a noise that the
earth trembled. The willow-wren with his army also came flying through
the air with such a humming, and whirring, and swarming that every one
was uneasy and afraid, and on both sides they advanced against each
other. But the willow-wren sent down the hornet, with orders to settle
beneath the fox’s tail, and sting with all his might. When the fox felt
the first string, he started so that he lifted one leg, from pain, but
he bore it, and still kept his tail high in the air; at the second
sting, he was forced to put it down for a moment; at the third, he could
hold out no longer, screamed, and put his tail between his legs. When
the animals saw that, they thought all was lost, and began to flee, each
into his hole, and the birds had won the battle.

Then the King and Queen flew home to their children and cried:
‘Children, rejoice, eat and drink to your heart’s content, we have won
the battle!’ But the young wrens said: ‘We will not eat yet, the bear
must come to the nest, and beg for pardon and say that we are honourable
children, before we will do that.’ Then the willow-wren flew to the
bear’s hole and cried: ‘Growler, you are to come to the nest to my
children, and beg their pardon, or else every rib of your body shall
be broken.’ So the bear crept thither in the greatest fear, and begged
their pardon. And now at last the young wrens were satisfied, and sat
down together and ate and drank, and made merry till quite late into the
night.




THE FROG-PRINCE

One fine evening a young princess put on her bonnet and clogs, and went
out to take a walk by herself in a wood; and when she came to a cool
spring of water, that rose in the midst of it, she sat herself down
to rest a while. Now she had a golden ball in her hand, which was her
favourite plaything; and she was always tossing it up into the air, and
catching it again as it fell. After a time she threw it up so high that
she missed catching it as it fell; and the ball bounded away, and rolled
along upon the ground, till at last it fell down into the spring. The
princess looked into the spring after her ball, but it was very deep, so
deep that she could not see the bottom of it. Then she began to bewail
her loss, and said, ‘Alas! if I could only get my ball again, I would
give all my fine clothes and jewels, and everything that I have in the
world.’

Whilst she was speaking, a frog put its head out of the water, and said,
‘Princess, why do you weep so bitterly?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘what can you
do for me, you nasty frog? My golden ball has fallen into the spring.’
The frog said, ‘I want not your pearls, and jewels, and fine clothes;
but if you will love me, and let me live with you and eat from off
your golden plate, and sleep upon your bed, I will bring you your ball
again.’ ‘What nonsense,’ thought the princess, ‘this silly frog is
talking! He can never even get out of the spring to visit me, though
he may be able to get my ball for me, and therefore I will tell him he
shall have what he asks.’ So she said to the frog, ‘Well, if you will
bring me my ball, I will do all you ask.’ Then the frog put his head
down, and dived deep under the water; and after a little while he came
up again, with the ball in his mouth, and threw it on the edge of the
spring. As soon as the young princess saw her ball, she ran to pick
it up; and she was so overjoyed to have it in her hand again, that she
never thought of the frog, but ran home with it as fast as she could.
The frog called after her, ‘Stay, princess, and take me with you as you
said,’ But she did not stop to hear a word.

The next day, just as the princess had sat down to dinner, she heard a
strange noise--tap, tap--plash, plash--as if something was coming up the
marble staircase: and soon afterwards there was a gentle knock at the
door, and a little voice cried out and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

Then the princess ran to the door and opened it, and there she saw
the frog, whom she had quite forgotten. At this sight she was sadly
frightened, and shutting the door as fast as she could came back to her
seat. The king, her father, seeing that something had frightened her,
asked her what was the matter. ‘There is a nasty frog,’ said she, ‘at
the door, that lifted my ball for me out of the spring this morning: I
told him that he should live with me here, thinking that he could never
get out of the spring; but there he is at the door, and he wants to come
in.’

While she was speaking the frog knocked again at the door, and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

Then the king said to the young princess, ‘As you have given your word
you must keep it; so go and let him in.’ She did so, and the frog hopped
into the room, and then straight on--tap, tap--plash, plash--from the
bottom of the room to the top, till he came up close to the table where
the princess sat. ‘Pray lift me upon chair,’ said he to the princess,
‘and let me sit next to you.’ As soon as she had done this, the frog
said, ‘Put your plate nearer to me, that I may eat out of it.’ This
she did, and when he had eaten as much as he could, he said, ‘Now I am
tired; carry me upstairs, and put me into your bed.’ And the princess,
though very unwilling, took him up in her hand, and put him upon the
pillow of her own bed, where he slept all night long. As soon as it was
light he jumped up, hopped downstairs, and went out of the house.
‘Now, then,’ thought the princess, ‘at last he is gone, and I shall be
troubled with him no more.’

But she was mistaken; for when night came again she heard the same
tapping at the door; and the frog came once more, and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

And when the princess opened the door the frog came in, and slept upon
her pillow as before, till the morning broke. And the third night he did
the same. But when the princess awoke on the following morning she was
astonished to see, instead of the frog, a handsome prince, gazing on her
with the most beautiful eyes she had ever seen, and standing at the head
of her bed.

He told her that he had been enchanted by a spiteful fairy, who had
changed him into a frog; and that he had been fated so to abide till
some princess should take him out of the spring, and let him eat from
her plate, and sleep upon her bed for three nights. ‘You,’ said the
prince, ‘have broken his cruel charm, and now I have nothing to wish for
but that you should go with me into my father’s kingdom, where I will
marry you, and love you as long as you live.’

The young princess, you may be sure, was not long in saying ‘Yes’ to
all this; and as they spoke a gay coach drove up, with eight beautiful
horses, decked with plumes of feathers and a golden harness; and behind
the coach rode the prince’s servant, faithful Heinrich, who had bewailed
the misfortunes of his dear master during his enchantment so long and so
bitterly, that his heart had well-nigh burst.

They then took leave of the king, and got into the coach with eight
horses, and all set out, full of joy and merriment, for the prince’s
kingdom, which they reached safely; and there they lived happily a great
many years.




CAT AND MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP

A certain cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and had said so much
to her about the great love and friendship she felt for her, that at
length the mouse agreed that they should live and keep house together.
‘But we must make a provision for winter, or else we shall suffer
from hunger,’ said the cat; ‘and you, little mouse, cannot venture
everywhere, or you will be caught in a trap some day.’ The good advice
was followed, and a pot of fat was bought, but they did not know where
to put it. At length, after much consideration, the cat said: ‘I know no
place where it will be better stored up than in the church, for no one
dares take anything away from there. We will set it beneath the altar,
and not touch it until we are really in need of it.’ So the pot was
placed in safety, but it was not long before the cat had a great
yearning for it, and said to the mouse: ‘I want to tell you something,
little mouse; my cousin has brought a little son into the world, and has
asked me to be godmother; he is white with brown spots, and I am to hold
him over the font at the christening. Let me go out today, and you look
after the house by yourself.’ ‘Yes, yes,’ answered the mouse, ‘by all
means go, and if you get anything very good to eat, think of me. I
should like a drop of sweet red christening wine myself.’ All this,
however, was untrue; the cat had no cousin, and had not been asked to
be godmother. She went straight to the church, stole to the pot of fat,
began to lick at it, and licked the top of the fat off. Then she took a
walk upon the roofs of the town, looked out for opportunities, and then
stretched herself in the sun, and licked her lips whenever she thought
of the pot of fat, and not until it was evening did she return home.
‘Well, here you are again,’ said the mouse, ‘no doubt you have had a
merry day.’ ‘All went off well,’ answered the cat. ‘What name did they
give the child?’ ‘Top off!’ said the cat quite coolly. ‘Top off!’ cried
the mouse, ‘that is a very odd and uncommon name, is it a usual one in
your family?’ ‘What does that matter,’ said the cat, ‘it is no worse
than Crumb-stealer, as your godchildren are called.’

Before long the cat was seized by another fit of yearning. She said to
the mouse: ‘You must do me a favour, and once more manage the house for
a day alone. I am again asked to be godmother, and, as the child has a
white ring round its neck, I cannot refuse.’ The good mouse consented,
but the cat crept behind the town walls to the church, and devoured
half the pot of fat. ‘Nothing ever seems so good as what one keeps to
oneself,’ said she, and was quite satisfied with her day’s work. When
she went home the mouse inquired: ‘And what was the child christened?’
‘Half-done,’ answered the cat. ‘Half-done! What are you saying? I
never heard the name in my life, I’ll wager anything it is not in the
calendar!’

The cat’s mouth soon began to water for some more licking. ‘All good
things go in threes,’ said she, ‘I am asked to stand godmother again.
The child is quite black, only it has white paws, but with that
exception, it has not a single white hair on its whole body; this only
happens once every few years, you will let me go, won’t you?’ ‘Top-off!
Half-done!’ answered the mouse, ‘they are such odd names, they make me
very thoughtful.’ ‘You sit at home,’ said the cat, ‘in your dark-grey
fur coat and long tail, and are filled with fancies, that’s because
you do not go out in the daytime.’ During the cat’s absence the mouse
cleaned the house, and put it in order, but the greedy cat entirely
emptied the pot of fat. ‘When everything is eaten up one has some
peace,’ said she to herself, and well filled and fat she did not return
home till night. The mouse at once asked what name had been given to
the third child. ‘It will not please you more than the others,’ said the
cat. ‘He is called All-gone.’ ‘All-gone,’ cried the mouse ‘that is the
most suspicious name of all! I have never seen it in print. All-gone;
what can that mean?’ and she shook her head, curled herself up, and lay
down to sleep.

From this time forth no one invited the cat to be godmother, but
when the winter had come and there was no longer anything to be found
outside, the mouse thought of their provision, and said: ‘Come, cat,
we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored up for ourselves--we
shall enjoy that.’ ‘Yes,’ answered the cat, ‘you will enjoy it as much
as you would enjoy sticking that dainty tongue of yours out of the
window.’ They set out on their way, but when they arrived, the pot of
fat certainly was still in its place, but it was empty. ‘Alas!’ said the
mouse, ‘now I see what has happened, now it comes to light! You are a true
friend! You have devoured all when you were standing godmother. First
top off, then half-done, then--’ ‘Will you hold your tongue,’ cried the
cat, ‘one word more, and I will eat you too.’ ‘All-gone’ was already on
the poor mouse’s lips; scarcely had she spoken it before the cat sprang
on her, seized her, and swallowed her down. Verily, that is the way of
the world.




THE GOOSE-GIRL

The king of a great land died, and left his queen to take care of their
only child. This child was a daughter, who was very beautiful; and her
mother loved her dearly, and was very kind to her. And there was a good
fairy too, who was fond of the princess, and helped her mother to watch
over her. When she grew up, she was betrothed to a prince who lived a
great way off; and as the time drew near for her to be married, she
got ready to set off on her journey to his country. Then the queen her
mother, packed up a great many costly things; jewels, and gold, and
silver; trinkets, fine dresses, and in short everything that became a
royal bride. And she gave her a waiting-maid to ride with her, and give
her into the bridegroom’s hands; and each had a horse for the journey.
Now the princess’s horse was the fairy’s gift, and it was called Falada,
and could speak.

When the time came for them to set out, the fairy went into her
bed-chamber, and took a little knife, and cut off a lock of her hair,
and gave it to the princess, and said, ‘Take care of it, dear child; for
it is a charm that may be of use to you on the road.’ Then they all took
a sorrowful leave of the princess; and she put the lock of hair into
her bosom, got upon her horse, and set off on her journey to her
bridegroom’s kingdom.

One day, as they were riding along by a brook, the princess began to
feel very thirsty: and she said to her maid, ‘Pray get down, and fetch
me some water in my golden cup out of yonder brook, for I want to
drink.’ ‘Nay,’ said the maid, ‘if you are thirsty, get off yourself, and
stoop down by the water and drink; I shall not be your waiting-maid any
longer.’ Then she was so thirsty that she got down, and knelt over the
little brook, and drank; for she was frightened, and dared not bring out
her golden cup; and she wept and said, ‘Alas! what will become of me?’
And the lock answered her, and said:

 ‘Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

But the princess was very gentle and meek, so she said nothing to her
maid’s ill behaviour, but got upon her horse again.

Then all rode farther on their journey, till the day grew so warm, and
the sun so scorching, that the bride began to feel very thirsty again;
and at last, when they came to a river, she forgot her maid’s rude
speech, and said, ‘Pray get down, and fetch me some water to drink in
my golden cup.’ But the maid answered her, and even spoke more haughtily
than before: ‘Drink if you will, but I shall not be your waiting-maid.’
Then the princess was so thirsty that she got off her horse, and lay
down, and held her head over the running stream, and cried and said,
‘What will become of me?’ And the lock of hair answered her again:

 ‘Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

And as she leaned down to drink, the lock of hair fell from her bosom,
and floated away with the water. Now she was so frightened that she did
not see it; but her maid saw it, and was very glad, for she knew the
charm; and she saw that the poor bride would be in her power, now that
she had lost the hair. So when the bride had done drinking, and would
have got upon Falada again, the maid said, ‘I shall ride upon Falada,
and you may have my horse instead’; so she was forced to give up her
horse, and soon afterwards to take off her royal clothes and put on her
maid’s shabby ones.

At last, as they drew near the end of their journey, this treacherous
servant threatened to kill her mistress if she ever told anyone what had
happened. But Falada saw it all, and marked it well.

Then the waiting-maid got upon Falada, and the real bride rode upon the
other horse, and they went on in this way till at last they came to the
royal court. There was great joy at their coming, and the prince flew to
meet them, and lifted the maid from her horse, thinking she was the one
who was to be his wife; and she was led upstairs to the royal chamber;
but the true princess was told to stay in the court below.

Now the old king happened just then to have nothing else to do; so he
amused himself by sitting at his kitchen window, looking at what was
going on; and he saw her in the courtyard. As she looked very pretty,
and too delicate for a waiting-maid, he went up into the royal chamber
to ask the bride who it was she had brought with her, that was thus left
standing in the court below. ‘I brought her with me for the sake of her
company on the road,’ said she; ‘pray give the girl some work to do,
that she may not be idle.’ The old king could not for some time think
of any work for her to do; but at last he said, ‘I have a lad who takes
care of my geese; she may go and help him.’ Now the name of this lad,
that the real bride was to help in watching the king’s geese, was
Curdken.

But the false bride said to the prince, ‘Dear husband, pray do me one
piece of kindness.’ ‘That I will,’ said the prince. ‘Then tell one of
your slaughterers to cut off the head of the horse I rode upon, for it
was very unruly, and plagued me sadly on the road’; but the truth was,
she was very much afraid lest Falada should some day or other speak, and
tell all she had done to the princess. She carried her point, and the
faithful Falada was killed; but when the true princess heard of it, she
wept, and begged the man to nail up Falada’s head against a large
dark gate of the city, through which she had to pass every morning
and evening, that there she might still see him sometimes. Then the
slaughterer said he would do as she wished; and cut off the head, and
nailed it up under the dark gate.

Early the next morning, as she and Curdken went out through the gate,
she said sorrowfully:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answered:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

Then they went out of the city, and drove the geese on. And when she
came to the meadow, she sat down upon a bank there, and let down her
waving locks of hair, which were all of pure silver; and when Curdken
saw it glitter in the sun, he ran up, and would have pulled some of the
locks out, but she cried:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

Then there came a wind, so strong that it blew off Curdken’s hat; and
away it flew over the hills: and he was forced to turn and run after
it; till, by the time he came back, she had done combing and curling her
hair, and had put it up again safe. Then he was very angry and sulky,
and would not speak to her at all; but they watched the geese until it
grew dark in the evening, and then drove them homewards.

The next morning, as they were going through the dark gate, the poor
girl looked up at Falada’s head, and cried:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answered:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

Then she drove on the geese, and sat down again in the meadow, and began
to comb out her hair as before; and Curdken ran up to her, and wanted to
take hold of it; but she cried out quickly:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

Then the wind came and blew away his hat; and off it flew a great way,
over the hills and far away, so that he had to run after it; and when
he came back she had bound up her hair again, and all was safe. So they
watched the geese till it grew dark.

In the evening, after they came home, Curdken went to the old king, and
said, ‘I cannot have that strange girl to help me to keep the geese any
longer.’ ‘Why?’ said the king. ‘Because, instead of doing any good, she
does nothing but tease me all day long.’ Then the king made him tell him
what had happened. And Curdken said, ‘When we go in the morning through
the dark gate with our flock of geese, she cries and talks with the head
of a horse that hangs upon the wall, and says:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answers:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

And Curdken went on telling the king what had happened upon the meadow
where the geese fed; how his hat was blown away; and how he was forced
to run after it, and to leave his flock of geese to themselves. But the
old king told the boy to go out again the next day: and when morning
came, he placed himself behind the dark gate, and heard how she spoke
to Falada, and how Falada answered. Then he went into the field, and
hid himself in a bush by the meadow’s side; and he soon saw with his own
eyes how they drove the flock of geese; and how, after a little time,
she let down her hair that glittered in the sun. And then he heard her
say:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

And soon came a gale of wind, and carried away Curdken’s hat, and away
went Curdken after it, while the girl went on combing and curling her
hair. All this the old king saw: so he went home without being seen; and
when the little goose-girl came back in the evening he called her aside,
and asked her why she did so: but she burst into tears, and said, ‘That
I must not tell you or any man, or I shall lose my life.’

But the old king begged so hard, that she had no peace till she had told
him all the tale, from beginning to end, word for word. And it was very
lucky for her that she did so, for when she had done the king ordered
royal clothes to be put upon her, and gazed on her with wonder, she was
so beautiful. Then he called his son and told him that he had only a
false bride; for that she was merely a waiting-maid, while the true
bride stood by. And the young king rejoiced when he saw her beauty, and
heard how meek and patient she had been; and without saying anything to
the false bride, the king ordered a great feast to be got ready for all
his court. The bridegroom sat at the top, with the false princess on one
side, and the true one on the other; but nobody knew her again, for her
beauty was quite dazzling to their eyes; and she did not seem at all
like the little goose-girl, now that she had her brilliant dress on.

When they had eaten and drank, and were very merry, the old king said
he would tell them a tale. So he began, and told all the story of the
princess, as if it was one that he had once heard; and he asked the
true waiting-maid what she thought ought to be done to anyone who would
behave thus. ‘Nothing better,’ said this false bride, ‘than that she
should be thrown into a cask stuck round with sharp nails, and that
two white horses should be put to it, and should drag it from street to
street till she was dead.’ ‘Thou art she!’ said the old king; ‘and as
thou has judged thyself, so shall it be done to thee.’ And the young
king was then married to his true wife, and they reigned over the
kingdom in peace and happiness all their lives; and the good fairy came
to see them, and restored the faithful Falada to life again.




THE ADVENTURES OF CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET


1. HOW THEY WENT TO THE MOUNTAINS TO EAT NUTS

‘The nuts are quite ripe now,’ said Chanticleer to his wife Partlet,
‘suppose we go together to the mountains, and eat as many as we can,
before the squirrel takes them all away.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said
Partlet, ‘let us go and make a holiday of it together.’

So they went to the mountains; and as it was a lovely day, they stayed
there till the evening. Now, whether it was that they had eaten so many
nuts that they could not walk, or whether they were lazy and would not,
I do not know: however, they took it into their heads that it did not
become them to go home on foot. So Chanticleer began to build a little
carriage of nutshells: and when it was finished, Partlet jumped into
it and sat down, and bid Chanticleer harness himself to it and draw her
home. ‘That’s a good joke!’ said Chanticleer; ‘no, that will never do;
I had rather by half walk home; I’ll sit on the box and be coachman,
if you like, but I’ll not draw.’ While this was passing, a duck came
quacking up and cried out, ‘You thieving vagabonds, what business have
you in my grounds? I’ll give it you well for your insolence!’ and upon
that she fell upon Chanticleer most lustily. But Chanticleer was no
coward, and returned the duck’s blows with his sharp spurs so fiercely
that she soon began to cry out for mercy; which was only granted her
upon condition that she would draw the carriage home for them. This she
agreed to do; and Chanticleer got upon the box, and drove, crying, ‘Now,
duck, get on as fast as you can.’ And away they went at a pretty good
pace.

After they had travelled along a little way, they met a needle and a pin
walking together along the road: and the needle cried out, ‘Stop, stop!’
and said it was so dark that they could hardly find their way, and such
dirty walking they could not get on at all: he told them that he and his
friend, the pin, had been at a public-house a few miles off, and had sat
drinking till they had forgotten how late it was; he begged therefore
that the travellers would be so kind as to give them a lift in their
carriage. Chanticleer observing that they were but thin fellows, and not
likely to take up much room, told them they might ride, but made them
promise not to dirty the wheels of the carriage in getting in, nor to
tread on Partlet’s toes.

Late at night they arrived at an inn; and as it was bad travelling in
the dark, and the duck seemed much tired, and waddled about a good
deal from one side to the other, they made up their minds to fix their
quarters there: but the landlord at first was unwilling, and said his
house was full, thinking they might not be very respectable company:
however, they spoke civilly to him, and gave him the egg which Partlet
had laid by the way, and said they would give him the duck, who was in
the habit of laying one every day: so at last he let them come in, and
they bespoke a handsome supper, and spent the evening very jollily.

Early in the morning, before it was quite light, and when nobody was
stirring in the inn, Chanticleer awakened his wife, and, fetching the
egg, they pecked a hole in it, ate it up, and threw the shells into the
fireplace: they then went to the pin and needle, who were fast asleep,
and seizing them by the heads, stuck one into the landlord’s easy chair
and the other into his handkerchief; and, having done this, they crept
away as softly as possible. However, the duck, who slept in the open
air in the yard, heard them coming, and jumping into the brook which ran
close by the inn, soon swam out of their reach.

An hour or two afterwards the landlord got up, and took his handkerchief
to wipe his face, but the pin ran into him and pricked him: then he
walked into the kitchen to light his pipe at the fire, but when he
stirred it up the eggshells flew into his eyes, and almost blinded him.
‘Bless me!’ said he, ‘all the world seems to have a design against my
head this morning’: and so saying, he threw himself sulkily into his
easy chair; but, oh dear! the needle ran into him; and this time the
pain was not in his head. He now flew into a very great passion, and,
suspecting the company who had come in the night before, he went to look
after them, but they were all off; so he swore that he never again
would take in such a troop of vagabonds, who ate a great deal, paid no
reckoning, and gave him nothing for his trouble but their apish tricks.


2. HOW CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET WENT TO VISIT MR KORBES

Another day, Chanticleer and Partlet wished to ride out together;
so Chanticleer built a handsome carriage with four red wheels, and
harnessed six mice to it; and then he and Partlet got into the carriage,
and away they drove. Soon afterwards a cat met them, and said, ‘Where
are you going?’ And Chanticleer replied,

 ‘All on our way
  A visit to pay
  To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’

Then the cat said, ‘Take me with you,’ Chanticleer said, ‘With all my
heart: get up behind, and be sure you do not fall off.’

 ‘Take care of this handsome coach of mine,
  Nor dirty my pretty red wheels so fine!
  Now, mice, be ready,
  And, wheels, run steady!
  For we are going a visit to pay
  To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’

Soon after came up a millstone, an egg, a duck, and a pin; and
Chanticleer gave them all leave to get into the carriage and go with
them.

When they arrived at Mr Korbes’s house, he was not at home; so the mice
drew the carriage into the coach-house, Chanticleer and Partlet flew
upon a beam, the cat sat down in the fireplace, the duck got into
the washing cistern, the pin stuck himself into the bed pillow, the
millstone laid himself over the house door, and the egg rolled himself
up in the towel.

When Mr Korbes came home, he went to the fireplace to make a fire; but
the cat threw all the ashes in his eyes: so he ran to the kitchen to
wash himself; but there the duck splashed all the water in his face; and
when he tried to wipe himself, the egg broke to pieces in the towel all
over his face and eyes. Then he was very angry, and went without his
supper to bed; but when he laid his head on the pillow, the pin ran into
his cheek: at this he became quite furious, and, jumping up, would have
run out of the house; but when he came to the door, the millstone fell
down on his head, and killed him on the spot.


3. HOW PARTLET DIED AND WAS BURIED, AND HOW CHANTICLEER DIED OF GRIEF

Another day Chanticleer and Partlet agreed to go again to the mountains
to eat nuts; and it was settled that all the nuts which they found
should be shared equally between them. Now Partlet found a very large
nut; but she said nothing about it to Chanticleer, and kept it all to
herself: however, it was so big that she could not swallow it, and it
stuck in her throat. Then she was in a great fright, and cried out to
Chanticleer, ‘Pray run as fast as you can, and fetch me some water, or I
shall be choked.’ Chanticleer ran as fast as he could to the river, and
said, ‘River, give me some water, for Partlet lies in the mountain, and
will be choked by a great nut.’ The river said, ‘Run first to the bride,
and ask her for a silken cord to draw up the water.’ Chanticleer ran to
the bride, and said, ‘Bride, you must give me a silken cord, for then
the river will give me water, and the water I will carry to Partlet, who
lies on the mountain, and will be choked by a great nut.’ But the bride
said, ‘Run first, and bring me my garland that is hanging on a willow
in the garden.’ Then Chanticleer ran to the garden, and took the garland
from the bough where it hung, and brought it to the bride; and then
the bride gave him the silken cord, and he took the silken cord to
the river, and the river gave him water, and he carried the water to
Partlet; but in the meantime she was choked by the great nut, and lay
quite dead, and never moved any more.

Then Chanticleer was very sorry, and cried bitterly; and all the beasts
came and wept with him over poor Partlet. And six mice built a little
hearse to carry her to her grave; and when it was ready they harnessed
themselves before it, and Chanticleer drove them. On the way they
met the fox. ‘Where are you going, Chanticleer?’ said he. ‘To bury my
Partlet,’ said the other. ‘May I go with you?’ said the fox. ‘Yes; but
you must get up behind, or my horses will not be able to draw you.’ Then
the fox got up behind; and presently the wolf, the bear, the goat, and
all the beasts of the wood, came and climbed upon the hearse.

So on they went till they came to a rapid stream. ‘How shall we get
over?’ said Chanticleer. Then said a straw, ‘I will lay myself across,
and you may pass over upon me.’ But as the mice were going over, the
straw slipped away and fell into the water, and the six mice all fell in
and were drowned. What was to be done? Then a large log of wood came
and said, ‘I am big enough; I will lay myself across the stream, and you
shall pass over upon me.’ So he laid himself down; but they managed
so clumsily, that the log of wood fell in and was carried away by the
stream. Then a stone, who saw what had happened, came up and kindly
offered to help poor Chanticleer by laying himself across the stream;
and this time he got safely to the other side with the hearse, and
managed to get Partlet out of it; but the fox and the other mourners,
who were sitting behind, were too heavy, and fell back into the water
and were all carried away by the stream and drowned.

Thus Chanticleer was left alone with his dead Partlet; and having dug
a grave for her, he laid her in it, and made a little hillock over her.
Then he sat down by the grave, and wept and mourned, till at last he
died too; and so all were dead.




RAPUNZEL

There were once a man and a woman who had long in vain wished for a
child. At length the woman hoped that God was about to grant her desire.
These people had a little window at the back of their house from which
a splendid garden could be seen, which was full of the most beautiful
flowers and herbs. It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no
one dared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress, who had
great power and was dreaded by all the world. One day the woman was
standing by this window and looking down into the garden, when she saw a
bed which was planted with the most beautiful rampion (rapunzel), and it
looked so fresh and green that she longed for it, she quite pined away,
and began to look pale and miserable. Then her husband was alarmed, and
asked: ‘What ails you, dear wife?’ ‘Ah,’ she replied, ‘if I can’t eat
some of the rampion, which is in the garden behind our house, I shall
die.’ The man, who loved her, thought: ‘Sooner than let your wife die,
bring her some of the rampion yourself, let it cost what it will.’
At twilight, he clambered down over the wall into the garden of the
enchantress, hastily clutched a handful of rampion, and took it to his
wife. She at once made herself a salad of it, and ate it greedily. It
tasted so good to her--so very good, that the next day she longed for it
three times as much as before. If he was to have any rest, her husband
must once more descend into the garden. In the gloom of evening
therefore, he let himself down again; but when he had clambered down the
wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw the enchantress standing before
him. ‘How can you dare,’ said she with angry look, ‘descend into my
garden and steal my rampion like a thief? You shall suffer for it!’
‘Ah,’ answered he, ‘let mercy take the place of justice, I only made
up my mind to do it out of necessity. My wife saw your rampion from the
window, and felt such a longing for it that she would have died if she
had not got some to eat.’ Then the enchantress allowed her anger to be
softened, and said to him: ‘If the case be as you say, I will allow
you to take away with you as much rampion as you will, only I make one
condition, you must give me the child which your wife will bring into
the world; it shall be well treated, and I will care for it like a
mother.’ The man in his terror consented to everything, and when the
woman was brought to bed, the enchantress appeared at once, gave the
child the name of Rapunzel, and took it away with her.

Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child under the sun. When she was
twelve years old, the enchantress shut her into a tower, which lay in
a forest, and had neither stairs nor door, but quite at the top was a
little window. When the enchantress wanted to go in, she placed herself
beneath it and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold, and when she
heard the voice of the enchantress she unfastened her braided tresses,
wound them round one of the hooks of the window above, and then the hair
fell twenty ells down, and the enchantress climbed up by it.

After a year or two, it came to pass that the king’s son rode through
the forest and passed by the tower. Then he heard a song, which was so
charming that he stood still and listened. This was Rapunzel, who in her
solitude passed her time in letting her sweet voice resound. The king’s
son wanted to climb up to her, and looked for the door of the tower,
but none was to be found. He rode home, but the singing had so deeply
touched his heart, that every day he went out into the forest and
listened to it. Once when he was thus standing behind a tree, he saw
that an enchantress came there, and he heard how she cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Then Rapunzel let down the braids of her hair, and the enchantress
climbed up to her. ‘If that is the ladder by which one mounts, I too
will try my fortune,’ said he, and the next day when it began to grow
dark, he went to the tower and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Immediately the hair fell down and the king’s son climbed up.

At first Rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man, such as her eyes
had never yet beheld, came to her; but the king’s son began to talk to
her quite like a friend, and told her that his heart had been so stirred
that it had let him have no rest, and he had been forced to see her.
Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she would take
him for her husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she
thought: ‘He will love me more than old Dame Gothel does’; and she said
yes, and laid her hand in his. She said: ‘I will willingly go away with
you, but I do not know how to get down. Bring with you a skein of silk
every time that you come, and I will weave a ladder with it, and when
that is ready I will descend, and you will take me on your horse.’ They
agreed that until that time he should come to her every evening, for the
old woman came by day. The enchantress remarked nothing of this, until
once Rapunzel said to her: ‘Tell me, Dame Gothel, how it happens that
you are so much heavier for me to draw up than the young king’s son--he
is with me in a moment.’ ‘Ah! you wicked child,’ cried the enchantress.
‘What do I hear you say! I thought I had separated you from all
the world, and yet you have deceived me!’ In her anger she clutched
Rapunzel’s beautiful tresses, wrapped them twice round her left hand,
seized a pair of scissors with the right, and snip, snap, they were cut
off, and the lovely braids lay on the ground. And she was so pitiless
that she took poor Rapunzel into a desert where she had to live in great
grief and misery.

On the same day that she cast out Rapunzel, however, the enchantress
fastened the braids of hair, which she had cut off, to the hook of the
window, and when the king’s son came and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

she let the hair down. The king’s son ascended, but instead of finding
his dearest Rapunzel, he found the enchantress, who gazed at him with
wicked and venomous looks. ‘Aha!’ she cried mockingly, ‘you would fetch
your dearest, but the beautiful bird sits no longer singing in the nest;
the cat has got it, and will scratch out your eyes as well. Rapunzel is
lost to you; you will never see her again.’ The king’s son was beside
himself with pain, and in his despair he leapt down from the tower. He
escaped with his life, but the thorns into which he fell pierced his
eyes. Then he wandered quite blind about the forest, ate nothing but
roots and berries, and did naught but lament and weep over the loss of
his dearest wife. Thus he roamed about in misery for some years, and at
length came to the desert where Rapunzel, with the twins to which she
had given birth, a boy and a girl, lived in wretchedness. He heard a
voice, and it seemed so familiar to him that he went towards it, and
when he approached, Rapunzel knew him and fell on his neck and wept. Two
of her tears wetted his eyes and they grew clear again, and he could
see with them as before. He led her to his kingdom where he was
joyfully received, and they lived for a long time afterwards, happy and
contented.




FUNDEVOGEL

There was once a forester who went into the forest to hunt, and as
he entered it he heard a sound of screaming as if a little child were
there. He followed the sound, and at last came to a high tree, and at
the top of this a little child was sitting, for the mother had fallen
asleep under the tree with the child, and a bird of prey had seen it in
her arms, had flown down, snatched it away, and set it on the high tree.

The forester climbed up, brought the child down, and thought to himself:
‘You will take him home with you, and bring him up with your Lina.’ He
took it home, therefore, and the two children grew up together. And the
one, which he had found on a tree was called Fundevogel, because a bird
had carried it away. Fundevogel and Lina loved each other so dearly that
when they did not see each other they were sad.

Now the forester had an old cook, who one evening took two pails and
began to fetch water, and did not go once only, but many times, out
to the spring. Lina saw this and said, ‘Listen, old Sanna, why are you
fetching so much water?’ ‘If you will never repeat it to anyone, I will
tell you why.’ So Lina said, no, she would never repeat it to anyone,
and then the cook said: ‘Early tomorrow morning, when the forester
is out hunting, I will heat the water, and when it is boiling in the
kettle, I will throw in Fundevogel, and will boil him in it.’

Early next morning the forester got up and went out hunting, and when he
was gone the children were still in bed. Then Lina said to Fundevogel:
‘If you will never leave me, I too will never leave you.’ Fundevogel
said: ‘Neither now, nor ever will I leave you.’ Then said Lina: ‘Then
will I tell you. Last night, old Sanna carried so many buckets of water
into the house that I asked her why she was doing that, and she said
that if I would promise not to tell anyone, and she said that early
tomorrow morning when father was out hunting, she would set the kettle
full of water, throw you into it and boil you; but we will get up
quickly, dress ourselves, and go away together.’

The two children therefore got up, dressed themselves quickly, and went
away. When the water in the kettle was boiling, the cook went into the
bedroom to fetch Fundevogel and throw him into it. But when she came in,
and went to the beds, both the children were gone. Then she was terribly
alarmed, and she said to herself: ‘What shall I say now when the
forester comes home and sees that the children are gone? They must be
followed instantly to get them back again.’

Then the cook sent three servants after them, who were to run and
overtake the children. The children, however, were sitting outside the
forest, and when they saw from afar the three servants running, Lina
said to Fundevogel: ‘Never leave me, and I will never leave you.’
Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now, nor ever.’ Then said Lina: ‘Do you become
a rose-tree, and I the rose upon it.’ When the three servants came to
the forest, nothing was there but a rose-tree and one rose on it, but
the children were nowhere. Then said they: ‘There is nothing to be done
here,’ and they went home and told the cook that they had seen nothing
in the forest but a little rose-bush with one rose on it. Then the
old cook scolded and said: ‘You simpletons, you should have cut the
rose-bush in two, and have broken off the rose and brought it home with
you; go, and do it at once.’ They had therefore to go out and look for
the second time. The children, however, saw them coming from a distance.
Then Lina said: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will never leave
you.’ Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now; nor ever.’ Said Lina: ‘Then do you
become a church, and I’ll be the chandelier in it.’ So when the three
servants came, nothing was there but a church, with a chandelier in
it. They said therefore to each other: ‘What can we do here, let us go
home.’ When they got home, the cook asked if they had not found them;
so they said no, they had found nothing but a church, and there was a
chandelier in it. And the cook scolded them and said: ‘You fools! why
did you not pull the church to pieces, and bring the chandelier home
with you?’ And now the old cook herself got on her legs, and went with
the three servants in pursuit of the children. The children, however,
saw from afar that the three servants were coming, and the cook waddling
after them. Then said Lina: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will
never leave you.’ Then said Fundevogel: ‘Neither now, nor ever.’
Said Lina: ‘Be a fishpond, and I will be the duck upon it.’ The cook,
however, came up to them, and when she saw the pond she lay down by it,
and was about to drink it up. But the duck swam quickly to her, seized
her head in its beak and drew her into the water, and there the old
witch had to drown. Then the children went home together, and were
heartily delighted, and if they have not died, they are living still.




THE VALIANT LITTLE TAILOR

One summer’s morning a little tailor was sitting on his table by the
window; he was in good spirits, and sewed with all his might. Then came
a peasant woman down the street crying: ‘Good jams, cheap! Good jams,
cheap!’ This rang pleasantly in the tailor’s ears; he stretched his
delicate head out of the window, and called: ‘Come up here, dear woman;
here you will get rid of your goods.’ The woman came up the three steps
to the tailor with her heavy basket, and he made her unpack all the pots
for him. He inspected each one, lifted it up, put his nose to it, and
at length said: ‘The jam seems to me to be good, so weigh me out four
ounces, dear woman, and if it is a quarter of a pound that is of no
consequence.’ The woman who had hoped to find a good sale, gave him
what he desired, but went away quite angry and grumbling. ‘Now, this jam
shall be blessed by God,’ cried the little tailor, ‘and give me health
and strength’; so he brought the bread out of the cupboard, cut himself
a piece right across the loaf and spread the jam over it. ‘This won’t
taste bitter,’ said he, ‘but I will just finish the jacket before I
take a bite.’ He laid the bread near him, sewed on, and in his joy, made
bigger and bigger stitches. In the meantime the smell of the sweet jam
rose to where the flies were sitting in great numbers, and they were
attracted and descended on it in hosts. ‘Hi! who invited you?’ said the
little tailor, and drove the unbidden guests away. The flies, however,
who understood no German, would not be turned away, but came back
again in ever-increasing companies. The little tailor at last lost all
patience, and drew a piece of cloth from the hole under his work-table,
and saying: ‘Wait, and I will give it to you,’ struck it mercilessly on
them. When he drew it away and counted, there lay before him no fewer
than seven, dead and with legs stretched out. ‘Are you a fellow of that
sort?’ said he, and could not help admiring his own bravery. ‘The whole
town shall know of this!’ And the little tailor hastened to cut himself
a girdle, stitched it, and embroidered on it in large letters: ‘Seven at
one stroke!’ ‘What, the town!’ he continued, ‘the whole world shall hear
of it!’ and his heart wagged with joy like a lamb’s tail. The tailor
put on the girdle, and resolved to go forth into the world, because he
thought his workshop was too small for his valour. Before he went away,
he sought about in the house to see if there was anything which he could
take with him; however, he found nothing but an old cheese, and that
he put in his pocket. In front of the door he observed a bird which
had caught itself in the thicket. It had to go into his pocket with the
cheese. Now he took to the road boldly, and as he was light and nimble,
he felt no fatigue. The road led him up a mountain, and when he had
reached the highest point of it, there sat a powerful giant looking
peacefully about him. The little tailor went bravely up, spoke to him,
and said: ‘Good day, comrade, so you are sitting there overlooking the
wide-spread world! I am just on my way thither, and want to try my luck.
Have you any inclination to go with me?’ The giant looked contemptuously
at the tailor, and said: ‘You ragamuffin! You miserable creature!’

‘Oh, indeed?’ answered the little tailor, and unbuttoned his coat, and
showed the giant the girdle, ‘there may you read what kind of a man I
am!’ The giant read: ‘Seven at one stroke,’ and thought that they had
been men whom the tailor had killed, and began to feel a little respect
for the tiny fellow. Nevertheless, he wished to try him first, and took
a stone in his hand and squeezed it together so that water dropped out
of it. ‘Do that likewise,’ said the giant, ‘if you have strength.’ ‘Is
that all?’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play with us!’ and put his
hand into his pocket, brought out the soft cheese, and pressed it until
the liquid ran out of it. ‘Faith,’ said he, ‘that was a little better,
wasn’t it?’ The giant did not know what to say, and could not believe it
of the little man. Then the giant picked up a stone and threw it so high
that the eye could scarcely follow it. ‘Now, little mite of a man, do
that likewise,’ ‘Well thrown,’ said the tailor, ‘but after all the stone
came down to earth again; I will throw you one which shall never come
back at all,’ and he put his hand into his pocket, took out the bird,
and threw it into the air. The bird, delighted with its liberty,
rose, flew away and did not come back. ‘How does that shot please you,
comrade?’ asked the tailor. ‘You can certainly throw,’ said the giant,
‘but now we will see if you are able to carry anything properly.’ He
took the little tailor to a mighty oak tree which lay there felled on
the ground, and said: ‘If you are strong enough, help me to carry the
tree out of the forest.’ ‘Readily,’ answered the little man; ‘take you
the trunk on your shoulders, and I will raise up the branches and twigs;
after all, they are the heaviest.’ The giant took the trunk on his
shoulder, but the tailor seated himself on a branch, and the giant, who
could not look round, had to carry away the whole tree, and the little
tailor into the bargain: he behind, was quite merry and happy, and
whistled the song: ‘Three tailors rode forth from the gate,’ as if
carrying the tree were child’s play. The giant, after he had dragged the
heavy burden part of the way, could go no further, and cried: ‘Hark
you, I shall have to let the tree fall!’ The tailor sprang nimbly down,
seized the tree with both arms as if he had been carrying it, and said
to the giant: ‘You are such a great fellow, and yet cannot even carry
the tree!’

They went on together, and as they passed a cherry-tree, the giant laid
hold of the top of the tree where the ripest fruit was hanging, bent it
down, gave it into the tailor’s hand, and bade him eat. But the little
tailor was much too weak to hold the tree, and when the giant let it go,
it sprang back again, and the tailor was tossed into the air with it.
When he had fallen down again without injury, the giant said: ‘What is
this? Have you not strength enough to hold the weak twig?’ ‘There is no
lack of strength,’ answered the little tailor. ‘Do you think that could
be anything to a man who has struck down seven at one blow? I leapt over
the tree because the huntsmen are shooting down there in the thicket.
Jump as I did, if you can do it.’ The giant made the attempt but he
could not get over the tree, and remained hanging in the branches, so
that in this also the tailor kept the upper hand.

The giant said: ‘If you are such a valiant fellow, come with me into our
cavern and spend the night with us.’ The little tailor was willing, and
followed him. When they went into the cave, other giants were sitting
there by the fire, and each of them had a roasted sheep in his hand and
was eating it. The little tailor looked round and thought: ‘It is much
more spacious here than in my workshop.’ The giant showed him a bed, and
said he was to lie down in it and sleep. The bed, however, was too
big for the little tailor; he did not lie down in it, but crept into
a corner. When it was midnight, and the giant thought that the little
tailor was lying in a sound sleep, he got up, took a great iron bar,
cut through the bed with one blow, and thought he had finished off the
grasshopper for good. With the earliest dawn the giants went into the
forest, and had quite forgotten the little tailor, when all at once he
walked up to them quite merrily and boldly. The giants were terrified,
they were afraid that he would strike them all dead, and ran away in a
great hurry.

The little tailor went onwards, always following his own pointed nose.
After he had walked for a long time, he came to the courtyard of a royal
palace, and as he felt weary, he lay down on the grass and fell asleep.
Whilst he lay there, the people came and inspected him on all sides, and
read on his girdle: ‘Seven at one stroke.’ ‘Ah!’ said they, ‘what does
the great warrior want here in the midst of peace? He must be a mighty
lord.’ They went and announced him to the king, and gave it as their
opinion that if war should break out, this would be a weighty and useful
man who ought on no account to be allowed to depart. The counsel pleased
the king, and he sent one of his courtiers to the little tailor to offer
him military service when he awoke. The ambassador remained standing by
the sleeper, waited until he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes,
and then conveyed to him this proposal. ‘For this very reason have
I come here,’ the tailor replied, ‘I am ready to enter the king’s
service.’ He was therefore honourably received, and a special dwelling
was assigned him.

The soldiers, however, were set against the little tailor, and wished
him a thousand miles away. ‘What is to be the end of this?’ they said
among themselves. ‘If we quarrel with him, and he strikes about him,
seven of us will fall at every blow; not one of us can stand against
him.’ They came therefore to a decision, betook themselves in a body to
the king, and begged for their dismissal. ‘We are not prepared,’ said
they, ‘to stay with a man who kills seven at one stroke.’ The king was
sorry that for the sake of one he should lose all his faithful servants,
wished that he had never set eyes on the tailor, and would willingly
have been rid of him again. But he did not venture to give him his
dismissal, for he dreaded lest he should strike him and all his people
dead, and place himself on the royal throne. He thought about it for a
long time, and at last found good counsel. He sent to the little tailor
and caused him to be informed that as he was a great warrior, he had one
request to make to him. In a forest of his country lived two giants,
who caused great mischief with their robbing, murdering, ravaging,
and burning, and no one could approach them without putting himself in
danger of death. If the tailor conquered and killed these two giants, he
would give him his only daughter to wife, and half of his kingdom as a
dowry, likewise one hundred horsemen should go with him to assist him.
‘That would indeed be a fine thing for a man like me!’ thought the
little tailor. ‘One is not offered a beautiful princess and half a
kingdom every day of one’s life!’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘I will soon
subdue the giants, and do not require the help of the hundred horsemen
to do it; he who can hit seven with one blow has no need to be afraid of
two.’

The little tailor went forth, and the hundred horsemen followed him.
When he came to the outskirts of the forest, he said to his followers:
‘Just stay waiting here, I alone will soon finish off the giants.’ Then
he bounded into the forest and looked about right and left. After a
while he perceived both giants. They lay sleeping under a tree, and
snored so that the branches waved up and down. The little tailor, not
idle, gathered two pocketsful of stones, and with these climbed up the
tree. When he was halfway up, he slipped down by a branch, until he sat
just above the sleepers, and then let one stone after another fall on
the breast of one of the giants. For a long time the giant felt nothing,
but at last he awoke, pushed his comrade, and said: ‘Why are you
knocking me?’ ‘You must be dreaming,’ said the other, ‘I am not knocking
you.’ They laid themselves down to sleep again, and then the tailor
threw a stone down on the second. ‘What is the meaning of this?’ cried
the other ‘Why are you pelting me?’ ‘I am not pelting you,’ answered
the first, growling. They disputed about it for a time, but as they were
weary they let the matter rest, and their eyes closed once more. The
little tailor began his game again, picked out the biggest stone, and
threw it with all his might on the breast of the first giant. ‘That
is too bad!’ cried he, and sprang up like a madman, and pushed his
companion against the tree until it shook. The other paid him back in
the same coin, and they got into such a rage that they tore up trees and
belaboured each other so long, that at last they both fell down dead on
the ground at the same time. Then the little tailor leapt down. ‘It is
a lucky thing,’ said he, ‘that they did not tear up the tree on which
I was sitting, or I should have had to sprint on to another like a
squirrel; but we tailors are nimble.’ He drew out his sword and gave
each of them a couple of thrusts in the breast, and then went out to the
horsemen and said: ‘The work is done; I have finished both of them
off, but it was hard work! They tore up trees in their sore need, and
defended themselves with them, but all that is to no purpose when a man
like myself comes, who can kill seven at one blow.’ ‘But are you not
wounded?’ asked the horsemen. ‘You need not concern yourself about
that,’ answered the tailor, ‘they have not bent one hair of mine.’ The
horsemen would not believe him, and rode into the forest; there they
found the giants swimming in their blood, and all round about lay the
torn-up trees.

The little tailor demanded of the king the promised reward; he, however,
repented of his promise, and again bethought himself how he could get
rid of the hero. ‘Before you receive my daughter, and the half of my
kingdom,’ said he to him, ‘you must perform one more heroic deed. In
the forest roams a unicorn which does great harm, and you must catch
it first.’ ‘I fear one unicorn still less than two giants. Seven at one
blow, is my kind of affair.’ He took a rope and an axe with him, went
forth into the forest, and again bade those who were sent with him to
wait outside. He had not long to seek. The unicorn soon came towards
him, and rushed directly on the tailor, as if it would gore him with its
horn without more ado. ‘Softly, softly; it can’t be done as quickly as
that,’ said he, and stood still and waited until the animal was quite
close, and then sprang nimbly behind the tree. The unicorn ran against
the tree with all its strength, and stuck its horn so fast in the trunk
that it had not the strength enough to draw it out again, and thus it
was caught. ‘Now, I have got the bird,’ said the tailor, and came out
from behind the tree and put the rope round its neck, and then with his
axe he hewed the horn out of the tree, and when all was ready he led the
beast away and took it to the king.

The king still would not give him the promised reward, and made a third
demand. Before the wedding the tailor was to catch him a wild boar that
made great havoc in the forest, and the huntsmen should give him their
help. ‘Willingly,’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play!’ He did not
take the huntsmen with him into the forest, and they were well pleased
that he did not, for the wild boar had several times received them in
such a manner that they had no inclination to lie in wait for him. When
the boar perceived the tailor, it ran on him with foaming mouth and
whetted tusks, and was about to throw him to the ground, but the hero
fled and sprang into a chapel which was near and up to the window at
once, and in one bound out again. The boar ran after him, but the tailor
ran round outside and shut the door behind it, and then the raging
beast, which was much too heavy and awkward to leap out of the window,
was caught. The little tailor called the huntsmen thither that they
might see the prisoner with their own eyes. The hero, however, went to
the king, who was now, whether he liked it or not, obliged to keep his
promise, and gave his daughter and the half of his kingdom. Had he known
that it was no warlike hero, but a little tailor who was standing before
him, it would have gone to his heart still more than it did. The wedding
was held with great magnificence and small joy, and out of a tailor a
king was made.

After some time the young queen heard her husband say in his dreams at
night: ‘Boy, make me the doublet, and patch the pantaloons, or else I
will rap the yard-measure over your ears.’ Then she discovered in what
state of life the young lord had been born, and next morning complained
of her wrongs to her father, and begged him to help her to get rid of
her husband, who was nothing else but a tailor. The king comforted her
and said: ‘Leave your bedroom door open this night, and my servants
shall stand outside, and when he has fallen asleep shall go in, bind
him, and take him on board a ship which shall carry him into the wide
world.’ The woman was satisfied with this; but the king’s armour-bearer,
who had heard all, was friendly with the young lord, and informed him of
the whole plot. ‘I’ll put a screw into that business,’ said the little
tailor. At night he went to bed with his wife at the usual time, and
when she thought that he had fallen asleep, she got up, opened the door,
and then lay down again. The little tailor, who was only pretending to
be asleep, began to cry out in a clear voice: ‘Boy, make me the doublet
and patch me the pantaloons, or I will rap the yard-measure over your
ears. I smote seven at one blow. I killed two giants, I brought away one
unicorn, and caught a wild boar, and am I to fear those who are standing
outside the room.’ When these men heard the tailor speaking thus, they
were overcome by a great dread, and ran as if the wild huntsman were
behind them, and none of them would venture anything further against
him. So the little tailor was and remained a king to the end of his
life.




HANSEL AND GRETEL

Hard by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with his wife and his
two children. The boy was called Hansel and the girl Gretel. He had
little to bite and to break, and once when great dearth fell on the
land, he could no longer procure even daily bread. Now when he thought
over this by night in his bed, and tossed about in his anxiety, he
groaned and said to his wife: ‘What is to become of us? How are we
to feed our poor children, when we no longer have anything even for
ourselves?’ ‘I’ll tell you what, husband,’ answered the woman, ‘early
tomorrow morning we will take the children out into the forest to where
it is the thickest; there we will light a fire for them, and give each
of them one more piece of bread, and then we will go to our work and
leave them alone. They will not find the way home again, and we shall be
rid of them.’ ‘No, wife,’ said the man, ‘I will not do that; how can I
bear to leave my children alone in the forest?--the wild animals would
soon come and tear them to pieces.’ ‘O, you fool!’ said she, ‘then we
must all four die of hunger, you may as well plane the planks for our
coffins,’ and she left him no peace until he consented. ‘But I feel very
sorry for the poor children, all the same,’ said the man.

The two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger, and had
heard what their stepmother had said to their father. Gretel wept
bitter tears, and said to Hansel: ‘Now all is over with us.’ ‘Be quiet,
Gretel,’ said Hansel, ‘do not distress yourself, I will soon find a way
to help us.’ And when the old folks had fallen asleep, he got up, put
on his little coat, opened the door below, and crept outside. The moon
shone brightly, and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house
glittered like real silver pennies. Hansel stooped and stuffed the
little pocket of his coat with as many as he could get in. Then he went
back and said to Gretel: ‘Be comforted, dear little sister, and sleep in
peace, God will not forsake us,’ and he lay down again in his bed. When
day dawned, but before the sun had risen, the woman came and awoke the
two children, saying: ‘Get up, you sluggards! we are going into the
forest to fetch wood.’ She gave each a little piece of bread, and said:
‘There is something for your dinner, but do not eat it up before then,
for you will get nothing else.’ Gretel took the bread under her apron,
as Hansel had the pebbles in his pocket. Then they all set out together
on the way to the forest. When they had walked a short time, Hansel
stood still and peeped back at the house, and did so again and again.
His father said: ‘Hansel, what are you looking at there and staying
behind for? Pay attention, and do not forget how to use your legs.’ ‘Ah,
father,’ said Hansel, ‘I am looking at my little white cat, which is
sitting up on the roof, and wants to say goodbye to me.’ The wife said:
‘Fool, that is not your little cat, that is the morning sun which is
shining on the chimneys.’ Hansel, however, had not been looking back at
the cat, but had been constantly throwing one of the white pebble-stones
out of his pocket on the road.

When they had reached the middle of the forest, the father said: ‘Now,
children, pile up some wood, and I will light a fire that you may not
be cold.’ Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood together, as high as a
little hill. The brushwood was lighted, and when the flames were burning
very high, the woman said: ‘Now, children, lay yourselves down by the
fire and rest, we will go into the forest and cut some wood. When we
have done, we will come back and fetch you away.’

Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire, and when noon came, each ate a little
piece of bread, and as they heard the strokes of the wood-axe they
believed that their father was near. It was not the axe, however, but
a branch which he had fastened to a withered tree which the wind was
blowing backwards and forwards. And as they had been sitting such a long
time, their eyes closed with fatigue, and they fell fast asleep. When
at last they awoke, it was already dark night. Gretel began to cry and
said: ‘How are we to get out of the forest now?’ But Hansel comforted
her and said: ‘Just wait a little, until the moon has risen, and then we
will soon find the way.’ And when the full moon had risen, Hansel took
his little sister by the hand, and followed the pebbles which shone like
newly-coined silver pieces, and showed them the way.

They walked the whole night long, and by break of day came once more
to their father’s house. They knocked at the door, and when the woman
opened it and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said: ‘You naughty
children, why have you slept so long in the forest?--we thought you were
never coming back at all!’ The father, however, rejoiced, for it had cut
him to the heart to leave them behind alone.

Not long afterwards, there was once more great dearth throughout the
land, and the children heard their mother saying at night to their
father: ‘Everything is eaten again, we have one half loaf left, and that
is the end. The children must go, we will take them farther into the
wood, so that they will not find their way out again; there is no other
means of saving ourselves!’ The man’s heart was heavy, and he thought:
‘It would be better for you to share the last mouthful with your
children.’ The woman, however, would listen to nothing that he had to
say, but scolded and reproached him. He who says A must say B, likewise,
and as he had yielded the first time, he had to do so a second time
also.

The children, however, were still awake and had heard the conversation.
When the old folks were asleep, Hansel again got up, and wanted to go
out and pick up pebbles as he had done before, but the woman had locked
the door, and Hansel could not get out. Nevertheless he comforted his
little sister, and said: ‘Do not cry, Gretel, go to sleep quietly, the
good God will help us.’

Early in the morning came the woman, and took the children out of their
beds. Their piece of bread was given to them, but it was still smaller
than the time before. On the way into the forest Hansel crumbled his
in his pocket, and often stood still and threw a morsel on the ground.
‘Hansel, why do you stop and look round?’ said the father, ‘go on.’ ‘I
am looking back at my little pigeon which is sitting on the roof, and
wants to say goodbye to me,’ answered Hansel. ‘Fool!’ said the woman,
‘that is not your little pigeon, that is the morning sun that is shining
on the chimney.’ Hansel, however little by little, threw all the crumbs
on the path.

The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, where they had
never in their lives been before. Then a great fire was again made, and
the mother said: ‘Just sit there, you children, and when you are tired
you may sleep a little; we are going into the forest to cut wood, and in
the evening when we are done, we will come and fetch you away.’ When
it was noon, Gretel shared her piece of bread with Hansel, who had
scattered his by the way. Then they fell asleep and evening passed, but
no one came to the poor children. They did not awake until it was dark
night, and Hansel comforted his little sister and said: ‘Just wait,
Gretel, until the moon rises, and then we shall see the crumbs of bread
which I have strewn about, they will show us our way home again.’ When
the moon came they set out, but they found no crumbs, for the many
thousands of birds which fly about in the woods and fields had picked
them all up. Hansel said to Gretel: ‘We shall soon find the way,’ but
they did not find it. They walked the whole night and all the next day
too from morning till evening, but they did not get out of the forest,
and were very hungry, for they had nothing to eat but two or three
berries, which grew on the ground. And as they were so weary that their
legs would carry them no longer, they lay down beneath a tree and fell
asleep.

It was now three mornings since they had left their father’s house. They
began to walk again, but they always came deeper into the forest, and if
help did not come soon, they must die of hunger and weariness. When it
was mid-day, they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a bough,
which sang so delightfully that they stood still and listened to it. And
when its song was over, it spread its wings and flew away before them,
and they followed it until they reached a little house, on the roof of
which it alighted; and when they approached the little house they saw
that it was built of bread and covered with cakes, but that the windows
were of clear sugar. ‘We will set to work on that,’ said Hansel, ‘and
have a good meal. I will eat a bit of the roof, and you Gretel, can eat
some of the window, it will taste sweet.’ Hansel reached up above, and
broke off a little of the roof to try how it tasted, and Gretel leant
against the window and nibbled at the panes. Then a soft voice cried
from the parlour:

 ‘Nibble, nibble, gnaw,
  Who is nibbling at my little house?’

The children answered:

 ‘The wind, the wind,
  The heaven-born wind,’

and went on eating without disturbing themselves. Hansel, who liked the
taste of the roof, tore down a great piece of it, and Gretel pushed out
the whole of one round window-pane, sat down, and enjoyed herself with
it. Suddenly the door opened, and a woman as old as the hills, who
supported herself on crutches, came creeping out. Hansel and Gretel were
so terribly frightened that they let fall what they had in their
hands. The old woman, however, nodded her head, and said: ‘Oh, you dear
children, who has brought you here? do come in, and stay with me. No
harm shall happen to you.’ She took them both by the hand, and led them
into her little house. Then good food was set before them, milk and
pancakes, with sugar, apples, and nuts. Afterwards two pretty little
beds were covered with clean white linen, and Hansel and Gretel lay down
in them, and thought they were in heaven.

The old woman had only pretended to be so kind; she was in reality
a wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and had only built the
little house of bread in order to entice them there. When a child fell
into her power, she killed it, cooked and ate it, and that was a feast
day with her. Witches have red eyes, and cannot see far, but they have
a keen scent like the beasts, and are aware when human beings draw near.
When Hansel and Gretel came into her neighbourhood, she laughed with
malice, and said mockingly: ‘I have them, they shall not escape me
again!’ Early in the morning before the children were awake, she was
already up, and when she saw both of them sleeping and looking so
pretty, with their plump and rosy cheeks she muttered to herself: ‘That
will be a dainty mouthful!’ Then she seized Hansel with her shrivelled
hand, carried him into a little stable, and locked him in behind a
grated door. Scream as he might, it would not help him. Then she went to
Gretel, shook her till she awoke, and cried: ‘Get up, lazy thing, fetch
some water, and cook something good for your brother, he is in the
stable outside, and is to be made fat. When he is fat, I will eat him.’
Gretel began to weep bitterly, but it was all in vain, for she was
forced to do what the wicked witch commanded.

And now the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, but Gretel got nothing
but crab-shells. Every morning the woman crept to the little stable, and
cried: ‘Hansel, stretch out your finger that I may feel if you will soon
be fat.’ Hansel, however, stretched out a little bone to her, and
the old woman, who had dim eyes, could not see it, and thought it was
Hansel’s finger, and was astonished that there was no way of fattening
him. When four weeks had gone by, and Hansel still remained thin, she
was seized with impatience and would not wait any longer. ‘Now, then,
Gretel,’ she cried to the girl, ‘stir yourself, and bring some water.
Let Hansel be fat or lean, tomorrow I will kill him, and cook him.’ Ah,
how the poor little sister did lament when she had to fetch the water,
and how her tears did flow down her cheeks! ‘Dear God, do help us,’ she
cried. ‘If the wild beasts in the forest had but devoured us, we should
at any rate have died together.’ ‘Just keep your noise to yourself,’
said the old woman, ‘it won’t help you at all.’

Early in the morning, Gretel had to go out and hang up the cauldron with
the water, and light the fire. ‘We will bake first,’ said the old woman,
‘I have already heated the oven, and kneaded the dough.’ She pushed poor
Gretel out to the oven, from which flames of fire were already darting.
‘Creep in,’ said the witch, ‘and see if it is properly heated, so that
we can put the bread in.’ And once Gretel was inside, she intended to
shut the oven and let her bake in it, and then she would eat her, too.
But Gretel saw what she had in mind, and said: ‘I do not know how I am
to do it; how do I get in?’ ‘Silly goose,’ said the old woman. ‘The door
is big enough; just look, I can get in myself!’ and she crept up and
thrust her head into the oven. Then Gretel gave her a push that drove
her far into it, and shut the iron door, and fastened the bolt. Oh! then
she began to howl quite horribly, but Gretel ran away and the godless
witch was miserably burnt to death.

Gretel, however, ran like lightning to Hansel, opened his little stable,
and cried: ‘Hansel, we are saved! The old witch is dead!’ Then Hansel
sprang like a bird from its cage when the door is opened. How they did
rejoice and embrace each other, and dance about and kiss each other! And
as they had no longer any need to fear her, they went into the witch’s
house, and in every corner there stood chests full of pearls and jewels.
‘These are far better than pebbles!’ said Hansel, and thrust into his
pockets whatever could be got in, and Gretel said: ‘I, too, will take
something home with me,’ and filled her pinafore full. ‘But now we must
be off,’ said Hansel, ‘that we may get out of the witch’s forest.’

When they had walked for two hours, they came to a great stretch of
water. ‘We cannot cross,’ said Hansel, ‘I see no foot-plank, and no
bridge.’ ‘And there is also no ferry,’ answered Gretel, ‘but a white
duck is swimming there: if I ask her, she will help us over.’ Then she
cried:

 ‘Little duck, little duck, dost thou see,
  Hansel and Gretel are waiting for thee?
  There’s never a plank, or bridge in sight,
  Take us across on thy back so white.’

The duck came to them, and Hansel seated himself on its back, and told
his sister to sit by him. ‘No,’ replied Gretel, ‘that will be too heavy
for the little duck; she shall take us across, one after the other.’ The
good little duck did so, and when they were once safely across and had
walked for a short time, the forest seemed to be more and more familiar
to them, and at length they saw from afar their father’s house. Then
they began to run, rushed into the parlour, and threw themselves round
their father’s neck. The man had not known one happy hour since he had
left the children in the forest; the woman, however, was dead. Gretel
emptied her pinafore until pearls and precious stones ran about the
room, and Hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to
add to them. Then all anxiety was at an end, and they lived together
in perfect happiness. My tale is done, there runs a mouse; whosoever
catches it, may make himself a big fur cap out of it.




THE MOUSE, THE BIRD, AND THE SAUSAGE

Once upon a time, a mouse, a bird, and a sausage, entered into
partnership and set up house together. For a long time all went well;
they lived in great comfort, and prospered so far as to be able to add
considerably to their stores. The bird’s duty was to fly daily into the
wood and bring in fuel; the mouse fetched the water, and the sausage saw
to the cooking.

When people are too well off they always begin to long for something
new. And so it came to pass, that the bird, while out one day, met a
fellow bird, to whom he boastfully expatiated on the excellence of his
household arrangements. But the other bird sneered at him for being a
poor simpleton, who did all the hard work, while the other two stayed
at home and had a good time of it. For, when the mouse had made the fire
and fetched in the water, she could retire into her little room and rest
until it was time to set the table. The sausage had only to watch the
pot to see that the food was properly cooked, and when it was near
dinner-time, he just threw himself into the broth, or rolled in and out
among the vegetables three or four times, and there they were, buttered,
and salted, and ready to be served. Then, when the bird came home and
had laid aside his burden, they sat down to table, and when they had
finished their meal, they could sleep their fill till the following
morning: and that was really a very delightful life.

Influenced by those remarks, the bird next morning refused to bring in
the wood, telling the others that he had been their servant long enough,
and had been a fool into the bargain, and that it was now time to make a
change, and to try some other way of arranging the work. Beg and pray
as the mouse and the sausage might, it was of no use; the bird remained
master of the situation, and the venture had to be made. They therefore
drew lots, and it fell to the sausage to bring in the wood, to the mouse
to cook, and to the bird to fetch the water.

And now what happened? The sausage started in search of wood, the bird
made the fire, and the mouse put on the pot, and then these two waited
till the sausage returned with the fuel for the following day. But the
sausage remained so long away, that they became uneasy, and the bird
flew out to meet him. He had not flown far, however, when he came across
a dog who, having met the sausage, had regarded him as his legitimate
booty, and so seized and swallowed him. The bird complained to the dog
of this bare-faced robbery, but nothing he said was of any avail, for
the dog answered that he found false credentials on the sausage, and
that was the reason his life had been forfeited.

He picked up the wood, and flew sadly home, and told the mouse all he
had seen and heard. They were both very unhappy, but agreed to make the
best of things and to remain with one another.

So now the bird set the table, and the mouse looked after the food and,
wishing to prepare it in the same way as the sausage, by rolling in and
out among the vegetables to salt and butter them, she jumped into the
pot; but she stopped short long before she reached the bottom, having
already parted not only with her skin and hair, but also with life.

Presently the bird came in and wanted to serve up the dinner, but he
could nowhere see the cook. In his alarm and flurry, he threw the wood
here and there about the floor, called and searched, but no cook was to
be found. Then some of the wood that had been carelessly thrown down,
caught fire and began to blaze. The bird hastened to fetch some water,
but his pail fell into the well, and he after it, and as he was unable
to recover himself, he was drowned.




MOTHER HOLLE

Once upon a time there was a widow who had two daughters; one of them
was beautiful and industrious, the other ugly and lazy. The mother,
however, loved the ugly and lazy one best, because she was her own
daughter, and so the other, who was only her stepdaughter, was made
to do all the work of the house, and was quite the Cinderella of the
family. Her stepmother sent her out every day to sit by the well in
the high road, there to spin until she made her fingers bleed. Now it
chanced one day that some blood fell on to the spindle, and as the girl
stopped over the well to wash it off, the spindle suddenly sprang out
of her hand and fell into the well. She ran home crying to tell of her
misfortune, but her stepmother spoke harshly to her, and after giving
her a violent scolding, said unkindly, ‘As you have let the spindle fall
into the well you may go yourself and fetch it out.’

The girl went back to the well not knowing what to do, and at last in
her distress she jumped into the water after the spindle.

She remembered nothing more until she awoke and found herself in a
beautiful meadow, full of sunshine, and with countless flowers blooming
in every direction.

She walked over the meadow, and presently she came upon a baker’s oven
full of bread, and the loaves cried out to her, ‘Take us out, take us
out, or alas! we shall be burnt to a cinder; we were baked through long
ago.’ So she took the bread-shovel and drew them all out.

She went on a little farther, till she came to a tree full of apples.
‘Shake me, shake me, I pray,’ cried the tree; ‘my apples, one and all,
are ripe.’ So she shook the tree, and the apples came falling down upon
her like rain; but she continued shaking until there was not a single
apple left upon it. Then she carefully gathered the apples together in a
heap and walked on again.

The next thing she came to was a little house, and there she saw an old
woman looking out, with such large teeth, that she was terrified, and
turned to run away. But the old woman called after her, ‘What are you
afraid of, dear child? Stay with me; if you will do the work of my house
properly for me, I will make you very happy. You must be very careful,
however, to make my bed in the right way, for I wish you always to shake
it thoroughly, so that the feathers fly about; then they say, down there
in the world, that it is snowing; for I am Mother Holle.’ The old woman
spoke so kindly, that the girl summoned up courage and agreed to enter
into her service.

She took care to do everything according to the old woman’s bidding and
every time she made the bed she shook it with all her might, so that the
feathers flew about like so many snowflakes. The old woman was as good
as her word: she never spoke angrily to her, and gave her roast and
boiled meats every day.

So she stayed on with Mother Holle for some time, and then she began
to grow unhappy. She could not at first tell why she felt sad, but she
became conscious at last of great longing to go home; then she knew she
was homesick, although she was a thousand times better off with Mother
Holle than with her mother and sister. After waiting awhile, she went
to Mother Holle and said, ‘I am so homesick, that I cannot stay with
you any longer, for although I am so happy here, I must return to my own
people.’

Then Mother Holle said, ‘I am pleased that you should want to go back
to your own people, and as you have served me so well and faithfully, I
will take you home myself.’

Thereupon she led the girl by the hand up to a broad gateway. The gate
was opened, and as the girl passed through, a shower of gold fell upon
her, and the gold clung to her, so that she was covered with it from
head to foot.

‘That is a reward for your industry,’ said Mother Holle, and as she
spoke she handed her the spindle which she had dropped into the well.

The gate was then closed, and the girl found herself back in the old
world close to her mother’s house. As she entered the courtyard, the
cock who was perched on the well, called out:

 ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  Your golden daughter’s come back to you.’

Then she went in to her mother and sister, and as she was so richly
covered with gold, they gave her a warm welcome. She related to them
all that had happened, and when the mother heard how she had come by her
great riches, she thought she should like her ugly, lazy daughter to go
and try her fortune. So she made the sister go and sit by the well
and spin, and the girl pricked her finger and thrust her hand into a
thorn-bush, so that she might drop some blood on to the spindle; then
she threw it into the well, and jumped in herself.

Like her sister she awoke in the beautiful meadow, and walked over it
till she came to the oven. ‘Take us out, take us out, or alas! we shall
be burnt to a cinder; we were baked through long ago,’ cried the loaves
as before. But the lazy girl answered, ‘Do you think I am going to dirty
my hands for you?’ and walked on.

Presently she came to the apple-tree. ‘Shake me, shake me, I pray; my
apples, one and all, are ripe,’ it cried. But she only answered, ‘A nice
thing to ask me to do, one of the apples might fall on my head,’ and
passed on.

At last she came to Mother Holle’s house, and as she had heard all about
the large teeth from her sister, she was not afraid of them, and engaged
herself without delay to the old woman.

The first day she was very obedient and industrious, and exerted herself
to please Mother Holle, for she thought of the gold she should get in
return. The next day, however, she began to dawdle over her work, and
the third day she was more idle still; then she began to lie in bed in
the mornings and refused to get up. Worse still, she neglected to
make the old woman’s bed properly, and forgot to shake it so that the
feathers might fly about. So Mother Holle very soon got tired of her,
and told her she might go. The lazy girl was delighted at this, and
thought to herself, ‘The gold will soon be mine.’ Mother Holle led her,
as she had led her sister, to the broad gateway; but as she was passing
through, instead of the shower of gold, a great bucketful of pitch came
pouring over her.

‘That is in return for your services,’ said the old woman, and she shut
the gate.

So the lazy girl had to go home covered with pitch, and the cock on the
well called out as she saw her:

 ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  Your dirty daughter’s come back to you.’

But, try what she would, she could not get the pitch off and it stuck to
her as long as she lived.




LITTLE RED-CAP [LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD]

Once upon a time there was a dear little girl who was loved by everyone
who looked at her, but most of all by her grandmother, and there was
nothing that she would not have given to the child. Once she gave her a
little cap of red velvet, which suited her so well that she would never
wear anything else; so she was always called ‘Little Red-Cap.’

One day her mother said to her: ‘Come, Little Red-Cap, here is a piece
of cake and a bottle of wine; take them to your grandmother, she is ill
and weak, and they will do her good. Set out before it gets hot, and
when you are going, walk nicely and quietly and do not run off the path,
or you may fall and break the bottle, and then your grandmother will
get nothing; and when you go into her room, don’t forget to say, “Good
morning”, and don’t peep into every corner before you do it.’

‘I will take great care,’ said Little Red-Cap to her mother, and gave
her hand on it.

The grandmother lived out in the wood, half a league from the village,
and just as Little Red-Cap entered the wood, a wolf met her. Red-Cap
did not know what a wicked creature he was, and was not at all afraid of
him.

‘Good day, Little Red-Cap,’ said he.

‘Thank you kindly, wolf.’

‘Whither away so early, Little Red-Cap?’

‘To my grandmother’s.’

‘What have you got in your apron?’

‘Cake and wine; yesterday was baking-day, so poor sick grandmother is to
have something good, to make her stronger.’

‘Where does your grandmother live, Little Red-Cap?’

‘A good quarter of a league farther on in the wood; her house stands
under the three large oak-trees, the nut-trees are just below; you
surely must know it,’ replied Little Red-Cap.

The wolf thought to himself: ‘What a tender young creature! what a nice
plump mouthful--she will be better to eat than the old woman. I must
act craftily, so as to catch both.’ So he walked for a short time by
the side of Little Red-Cap, and then he said: ‘See, Little Red-Cap, how
pretty the flowers are about here--why do you not look round? I believe,
too, that you do not hear how sweetly the little birds are singing; you
walk gravely along as if you were going to school, while everything else
out here in the wood is merry.’

Little Red-Cap raised her eyes, and when she saw the sunbeams dancing
here and there through the trees, and pretty flowers growing everywhere,
she thought: ‘Suppose I take grandmother a fresh nosegay; that would
please her too. It is so early in the day that I shall still get there
in good time’; and so she ran from the path into the wood to look for
flowers. And whenever she had picked one, she fancied that she saw a
still prettier one farther on, and ran after it, and so got deeper and
deeper into the wood.

Meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother’s house and knocked
at the door.

‘Who is there?’

‘Little Red-Cap,’ replied the wolf. ‘She is bringing cake and wine; open
the door.’

‘Lift the latch,’ called out the grandmother, ‘I am too weak, and cannot
get up.’

The wolf lifted the latch, the door sprang open, and without saying a
word he went straight to the grandmother’s bed, and devoured her. Then
he put on her clothes, dressed himself in her cap laid himself in bed
and drew the curtains.

Little Red-Cap, however, had been running about picking flowers,
and when she had gathered so many that she could carry no more, she
remembered her grandmother, and set out on the way to her.

She was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open, and when she
went into the room, she had such a strange feeling that she said to
herself: ‘Oh dear! how uneasy I feel today, and at other times I like
being with grandmother so much.’ She called out: ‘Good morning,’ but
received no answer; so she went to the bed and drew back the curtains.
There lay her grandmother with her cap pulled far over her face, and
looking very strange.

‘Oh! grandmother,’ she said, ‘what big ears you have!’

‘The better to hear you with, my child,’ was the reply.

‘But, grandmother, what big eyes you have!’ she said.

‘The better to see you with, my dear.’

‘But, grandmother, what large hands you have!’

‘The better to hug you with.’

‘Oh! but, grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have!’

‘The better to eat you with!’

And scarcely had the wolf said this, than with one bound he was out of
bed and swallowed up Red-Cap.

When the wolf had appeased his appetite, he lay down again in the bed,
fell asleep and began to snore very loud. The huntsman was just passing
the house, and thought to himself: ‘How the old woman is snoring! I must
just see if she wants anything.’ So he went into the room, and when he
came to the bed, he saw that the wolf was lying in it. ‘Do I find you
here, you old sinner!’ said he. ‘I have long sought you!’ Then just as
he was going to fire at him, it occurred to him that the wolf might have
devoured the grandmother, and that she might still be saved, so he did
not fire, but took a pair of scissors, and began to cut open the stomach
of the sleeping wolf. When he had made two snips, he saw the little
Red-Cap shining, and then he made two snips more, and the little girl
sprang out, crying: ‘Ah, how frightened I have been! How dark it was
inside the wolf’; and after that the aged grandmother came out alive
also, but scarcely able to breathe. Red-Cap, however, quickly fetched
great stones with which they filled the wolf’s belly, and when he awoke,
he wanted to run away, but the stones were so heavy that he collapsed at
once, and fell dead.

Then all three were delighted. The huntsman drew off the wolf’s skin and
went home with it; the grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine which
Red-Cap had brought, and revived, but Red-Cap thought to herself: ‘As
long as I live, I will never by myself leave the path, to run into the
wood, when my mother has forbidden me to do so.’




It also related that once when Red-Cap was again taking cakes to the old
grandmother, another wolf spoke to her, and tried to entice her from the
path. Red-Cap, however, was on her guard, and went straight forward on
her way, and told her grandmother that she had met the wolf, and that he
had said ‘good morning’ to her, but with such a wicked look in his eyes,
that if they had not been on the public road she was certain he would
have eaten her up. ‘Well,’ said the grandmother, ‘we will shut the door,
that he may not come in.’ Soon afterwards the wolf knocked, and cried:
‘Open the door, grandmother, I am Little Red-Cap, and am bringing you
some cakes.’ But they did not speak, or open the door, so the grey-beard
stole twice or thrice round the house, and at last jumped on the roof,
intending to wait until Red-Cap went home in the evening, and then to
steal after her and devour her in the darkness. But the grandmother
saw what was in his thoughts. In front of the house was a great stone
trough, so she said to the child: ‘Take the pail, Red-Cap; I made some
sausages yesterday, so carry the water in which I boiled them to the
trough.’ Red-Cap carried until the great trough was quite full. Then the
smell of the sausages reached the wolf, and he sniffed and peeped down,
and at last stretched out his neck so far that he could no longer keep
his footing and began to slip, and slipped down from the roof straight
into the great trough, and was drowned. But Red-Cap went joyously home,
and no one ever did anything to harm her again.




THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM

There was once a miller who had one beautiful daughter, and as she was
grown up, he was anxious that she should be well married and provided
for. He said to himself, ‘I will give her to the first suitable man who
comes and asks for her hand.’ Not long after a suitor appeared, and as
he appeared to be very rich and the miller could see nothing in him with
which to find fault, he betrothed his daughter to him. But the girl did
not care for the man as a girl ought to care for her betrothed husband.
She did not feel that she could trust him, and she could not look at him
nor think of him without an inward shudder. One day he said to her, ‘You
have not yet paid me a visit, although we have been betrothed for some
time.’ ‘I do not know where your house is,’ she answered. ‘My house is
out there in the dark forest,’ he said. She tried to excuse herself by
saying that she would not be able to find the way thither. Her betrothed
only replied, ‘You must come and see me next Sunday; I have already
invited guests for that day, and that you may not mistake the way, I
will strew ashes along the path.’

When Sunday came, and it was time for the girl to start, a feeling of
dread came over her which she could not explain, and that she might
be able to find her path again, she filled her pockets with peas and
lentils to sprinkle on the ground as she went along. On reaching the
entrance to the forest she found the path strewed with ashes, and these
she followed, throwing down some peas on either side of her at every
step she took. She walked the whole day until she came to the deepest,
darkest part of the forest. There she saw a lonely house, looking so
grim and mysterious, that it did not please her at all. She stepped
inside, but not a soul was to be seen, and a great silence reigned
throughout. Suddenly a voice cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

The girl looked up and saw that the voice came from a bird hanging in a
cage on the wall. Again it cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

The girl passed on, going from room to room of the house, but they were
all empty, and still she saw no one. At last she came to the cellar,
and there sat a very, very old woman, who could not keep her head from
shaking. ‘Can you tell me,’ asked the girl, ‘if my betrothed husband
lives here?’

‘Ah, you poor child,’ answered the old woman, ‘what a place for you to
come to! This is a murderers’ den. You think yourself a promised bride,
and that your marriage will soon take place, but it is with death that
you will keep your marriage feast. Look, do you see that large cauldron
of water which I am obliged to keep on the fire! As soon as they have
you in their power they will kill you without mercy, and cook and eat
you, for they are eaters of men. If I did not take pity on you and save
you, you would be lost.’

Thereupon the old woman led her behind a large cask, which quite hid her
from view. ‘Keep as still as a mouse,’ she said; ‘do not move or speak,
or it will be all over with you. Tonight, when the robbers are
all asleep, we will flee together. I have long been waiting for an
opportunity to escape.’

The words were hardly out of her mouth when the godless crew returned,
dragging another young girl along with them. They were all drunk, and
paid no heed to her cries and lamentations. They gave her wine to drink,
three glasses full, one of white wine, one of red, and one of yellow,
and with that her heart gave way and she died. Then they tore off her
dainty clothing, laid her on a table, and cut her beautiful body into
pieces, and sprinkled salt upon it.

The poor betrothed girl crouched trembling and shuddering behind the
cask, for she saw what a terrible fate had been intended for her by
the robbers. One of them now noticed a gold ring still remaining on
the little finger of the murdered girl, and as he could not draw it off
easily, he took a hatchet and cut off the finger; but the finger sprang
into the air, and fell behind the cask into the lap of the girl who was
hiding there. The robber took a light and began looking for it, but he
could not find it. ‘Have you looked behind the large cask?’ said one of
the others. But the old woman called out, ‘Come and eat your suppers,
and let the thing be till tomorrow; the finger won’t run away.’

‘The old woman is right,’ said the robbers, and they ceased looking for
the finger and sat down.

The old woman then mixed a sleeping draught with their wine, and before
long they were all lying on the floor of the cellar, fast asleep and
snoring. As soon as the girl was assured of this, she came from behind
the cask. She was obliged to step over the bodies of the sleepers, who
were lying close together, and every moment she was filled with renewed
dread lest she should awaken them. But God helped her, so that she
passed safely over them, and then she and the old woman went upstairs,
opened the door, and hastened as fast as they could from the murderers’
den. They found the ashes scattered by the wind, but the peas and
lentils had sprouted, and grown sufficiently above the ground, to guide
them in the moonlight along the path. All night long they walked, and it
was morning before they reached the mill. Then the girl told her father
all that had happened.

The day came that had been fixed for the marriage. The bridegroom
arrived and also a large company of guests, for the miller had taken
care to invite all his friends and relations. As they sat at the feast,
each guest in turn was asked to tell a tale; the bride sat still and did
not say a word.

‘And you, my love,’ said the bridegroom, turning to her, ‘is there no
tale you know? Tell us something.’

‘I will tell you a dream, then,’ said the bride. ‘I went alone through a
forest and came at last to a house; not a soul could I find within, but
a bird that was hanging in a cage on the wall cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

and again a second time it said these words.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘I went on through the house from room to room, but they were all empty,
and everything was so grim and mysterious. At last I went down to the
cellar, and there sat a very, very old woman, who could not keep her
head still. I asked her if my betrothed lived here, and she answered,
“Ah, you poor child, you are come to a murderers’ den; your betrothed
does indeed live here, but he will kill you without mercy and afterwards
cook and eat you.”’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘The old woman hid me behind a large cask, and scarcely had she done
this when the robbers returned home, dragging a young girl along with
them. They gave her three kinds of wine to drink, white, red, and
yellow, and with that she died.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘Then they tore off her dainty clothing, and cut her beautiful body into
pieces and sprinkled salt upon it.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘And one of the robbers saw that there was a gold ring still left on her
finger, and as it was difficult to draw off, he took a hatchet and cut
off her finger; but the finger sprang into the air and fell behind the
great cask into my lap. And here is the finger with the ring.’ And
with these words the bride drew forth the finger and shewed it to the
assembled guests.

The bridegroom, who during this recital had grown deadly pale, up and
tried to escape, but the guests seized him and held him fast. They
delivered him up to justice, and he and all his murderous band were
condemned to death for their wicked deeds.




TOM THUMB

A poor woodman sat in his cottage one night, smoking his pipe by the
fireside, while his wife sat by his side spinning. ‘How lonely it is,
wife,’ said he, as he puffed out a long curl of smoke, ‘for you and me
to sit here by ourselves, without any children to play about and amuse
us while other people seem so happy and merry with their children!’
‘What you say is very true,’ said the wife, sighing, and turning round
her wheel; ‘how happy should I be if I had but one child! If it were
ever so small--nay, if it were no bigger than my thumb--I should be very
happy, and love it dearly.’ Now--odd as you may think it--it came to
pass that this good woman’s wish was fulfilled, just in the very way she
had wished it; for, not long afterwards, she had a little boy, who was
quite healthy and strong, but was not much bigger than my thumb. So
they said, ‘Well, we cannot say we have not got what we wished for, and,
little as he is, we will love him dearly.’ And they called him Thomas
Thumb.

They gave him plenty of food, yet for all they could do he never grew
bigger, but kept just the same size as he had been when he was born.
Still, his eyes were sharp and sparkling, and he soon showed himself to
be a clever little fellow, who always knew well what he was about.

One day, as the woodman was getting ready to go into the wood to cut
fuel, he said, ‘I wish I had someone to bring the cart after me, for I
want to make haste.’ ‘Oh, father,’ cried Tom, ‘I will take care of that;
the cart shall be in the wood by the time you want it.’ Then the woodman
laughed, and said, ‘How can that be? you cannot reach up to the horse’s
bridle.’ ‘Never mind that, father,’ said Tom; ‘if my mother will only
harness the horse, I will get into his ear and tell him which way to
go.’ ‘Well,’ said the father, ‘we will try for once.’

When the time came the mother harnessed the horse to the cart, and put
Tom into his ear; and as he sat there the little man told the beast how
to go, crying out, ‘Go on!’ and ‘Stop!’ as he wanted: and thus the horse
went on just as well as if the woodman had driven it himself into the
wood. It happened that as the horse was going a little too fast, and Tom
was calling out, ‘Gently! gently!’ two strangers came up. ‘What an odd
thing that is!’ said one: ‘there is a cart going along, and I hear a
carter talking to the horse, but yet I can see no one.’ ‘That is queer,
indeed,’ said the other; ‘let us follow the cart, and see where it
goes.’ So they went on into the wood, till at last they came to the
place where the woodman was. Then Tom Thumb, seeing his father, cried
out, ‘See, father, here I am with the cart, all right and safe! now take
me down!’ So his father took hold of the horse with one hand, and with
the other took his son out of the horse’s ear, and put him down upon a
straw, where he sat as merry as you please.

The two strangers were all this time looking on, and did not know what
to say for wonder. At last one took the other aside, and said, ‘That
little urchin will make our fortune, if we can get him, and carry him
about from town to town as a show; we must buy him.’ So they went up to
the woodman, and asked him what he would take for the little man. ‘He
will be better off,’ said they, ‘with us than with you.’ ‘I won’t sell
him at all,’ said the father; ‘my own flesh and blood is dearer to me
than all the silver and gold in the world.’ But Tom, hearing of the
bargain they wanted to make, crept up his father’s coat to his shoulder
and whispered in his ear, ‘Take the money, father, and let them have me;
I’ll soon come back to you.’

So the woodman at last said he would sell Tom to the strangers for a
large piece of gold, and they paid the price. ‘Where would you like to
sit?’ said one of them. ‘Oh, put me on the rim of your hat; that will be
a nice gallery for me; I can walk about there and see the country as we
go along.’ So they did as he wished; and when Tom had taken leave of his
father they took him away with them.

They journeyed on till it began to be dusky, and then the little man
said, ‘Let me get down, I’m tired.’ So the man took off his hat, and
put him down on a clod of earth, in a ploughed field by the side of the
road. But Tom ran about amongst the furrows, and at last slipped into
an old mouse-hole. ‘Good night, my masters!’ said he, ‘I’m off! mind and
look sharp after me the next time.’ Then they ran at once to the place,
and poked the ends of their sticks into the mouse-hole, but all in vain;
Tom only crawled farther and farther in; and at last it became quite
dark, so that they were forced to go their way without their prize, as
sulky as could be.

When Tom found they were gone, he came out of his hiding-place. ‘What
dangerous walking it is,’ said he, ‘in this ploughed field! If I were to
fall from one of these great clods, I should undoubtedly break my neck.’
At last, by good luck, he found a large empty snail-shell. ‘This is
lucky,’ said he, ‘I can sleep here very well’; and in he crept.

Just as he was falling asleep, he heard two men passing by, chatting
together; and one said to the other, ‘How can we rob that rich parson’s
house of his silver and gold?’ ‘I’ll tell you!’ cried Tom. ‘What noise
was that?’ said the thief, frightened; ‘I’m sure I heard someone speak.’
They stood still listening, and Tom said, ‘Take me with you, and I’ll
soon show you how to get the parson’s money.’ ‘But where are you?’ said
they. ‘Look about on the ground,’ answered he, ‘and listen where the
sound comes from.’ At last the thieves found him out, and lifted him
up in their hands. ‘You little urchin!’ they said, ‘what can you do for
us?’ ‘Why, I can get between the iron window-bars of the parson’s house,
and throw you out whatever you want.’ ‘That’s a good thought,’ said the
thieves; ‘come along, we shall see what you can do.’

When they came to the parson’s house, Tom slipped through the
window-bars into the room, and then called out as loud as he could bawl,
‘Will you have all that is here?’ At this the thieves were frightened,
and said, ‘Softly, softly! Speak low, that you may not awaken anybody.’
But Tom seemed as if he did not understand them, and bawled out again,
‘How much will you have? Shall I throw it all out?’ Now the cook lay in
the next room; and hearing a noise she raised herself up in her bed and
listened. Meantime the thieves were frightened, and ran off a little
way; but at last they plucked up their hearts, and said, ‘The little
urchin is only trying to make fools of us.’ So they came back and
whispered softly to him, saying, ‘Now let us have no more of your
roguish jokes; but throw us out some of the money.’ Then Tom called out
as loud as he could, ‘Very well! hold your hands! here it comes.’

The cook heard this quite plain, so she sprang out of bed, and ran to
open the door. The thieves ran off as if a wolf was at their tails: and
the maid, having groped about and found nothing, went away for a light.
By the time she came back, Tom had slipped off into the barn; and when
she had looked about and searched every hole and corner, and found
nobody, she went to bed, thinking she must have been dreaming with her
eyes open.

The little man crawled about in the hay-loft, and at last found a snug
place to finish his night’s rest in; so he laid himself down, meaning
to sleep till daylight, and then find his way home to his father and
mother. But alas! how woefully he was undone! what crosses and sorrows
happen to us all in this world! The cook got up early, before daybreak,
to feed the cows; and going straight to the hay-loft, carried away
a large bundle of hay, with the little man in the middle of it, fast
asleep. He still, however, slept on, and did not awake till he found
himself in the mouth of the cow; for the cook had put the hay into the
cow’s rick, and the cow had taken Tom up in a mouthful of it. ‘Good
lack-a-day!’ said he, ‘how came I to tumble into the mill?’ But he soon
found out where he really was; and was forced to have all his wits about
him, that he might not get between the cow’s teeth, and so be crushed to
death. At last down he went into her stomach. ‘It is rather dark,’ said
he; ‘they forgot to build windows in this room to let the sun in; a
candle would be no bad thing.’

Though he made the best of his bad luck, he did not like his quarters at
all; and the worst of it was, that more and more hay was always coming
down, and the space left for him became smaller and smaller. At last he
cried out as loud as he could, ‘Don’t bring me any more hay! Don’t bring
me any more hay!’

The maid happened to be just then milking the cow; and hearing someone
speak, but seeing nobody, and yet being quite sure it was the same voice
that she had heard in the night, she was so frightened that she fell off
her stool, and overset the milk-pail. As soon as she could pick herself
up out of the dirt, she ran off as fast as she could to her master the
parson, and said, ‘Sir, sir, the cow is talking!’ But the parson
said, ‘Woman, thou art surely mad!’ However, he went with her into the
cow-house, to try and see what was the matter.

Scarcely had they set foot on the threshold, when Tom called out, ‘Don’t
bring me any more hay!’ Then the parson himself was frightened; and
thinking the cow was surely bewitched, told his man to kill her on the
spot. So the cow was killed, and cut up; and the stomach, in which Tom
lay, was thrown out upon a dunghill.

Tom soon set himself to work to get out, which was not a very easy
task; but at last, just as he had made room to get his head out, fresh
ill-luck befell him. A hungry wolf sprang out, and swallowed up the
whole stomach, with Tom in it, at one gulp, and ran away.

Tom, however, was still not disheartened; and thinking the wolf would
not dislike having some chat with him as he was going along, he called
out, ‘My good friend, I can show you a famous treat.’ ‘Where’s that?’
said the wolf. ‘In such and such a house,’ said Tom, describing his own
father’s house. ‘You can crawl through the drain into the kitchen and
then into the pantry, and there you will find cakes, ham, beef, cold
chicken, roast pig, apple-dumplings, and everything that your heart can
wish.’

The wolf did not want to be asked twice; so that very night he went to
the house and crawled through the drain into the kitchen, and then into
the pantry, and ate and drank there to his heart’s content. As soon as
he had had enough he wanted to get away; but he had eaten so much that
he could not go out by the same way he came in.

This was just what Tom had reckoned upon; and now he began to set up a
great shout, making all the noise he could. ‘Will you be easy?’ said the
wolf; ‘you’ll awaken everybody in the house if you make such a clatter.’
‘What’s that to me?’ said the little man; ‘you have had your frolic, now
I’ve a mind to be merry myself’; and he began, singing and shouting as
loud as he could.

The woodman and his wife, being awakened by the noise, peeped through
a crack in the door; but when they saw a wolf was there, you may well
suppose that they were sadly frightened; and the woodman ran for his
axe, and gave his wife a scythe. ‘Do you stay behind,’ said the woodman,
‘and when I have knocked him on the head you must rip him up with the
scythe.’ Tom heard all this, and cried out, ‘Father, father! I am here,
the wolf has swallowed me.’ And his father said, ‘Heaven be praised! we
have found our dear child again’; and he told his wife not to use the
scythe for fear she should hurt him. Then he aimed a great blow, and
struck the wolf on the head, and killed him on the spot! and when he was
dead they cut open his body, and set Tommy free. ‘Ah!’ said the father,
‘what fears we have had for you!’ ‘Yes, father,’ answered he; ‘I have
travelled all over the world, I think, in one way or other, since we
parted; and now I am very glad to come home and get fresh air again.’
‘Why, where have you been?’ said his father. ‘I have been in a
mouse-hole--and in a snail-shell--and down a cow’s throat--and in the
wolf’s belly; and yet here I am again, safe and sound.’

‘Well,’ said they, ‘you are come back, and we will not sell you again
for all the riches in the world.’

Then they hugged and kissed their dear little son, and gave him plenty
to eat and drink, for he was very hungry; and then they fetched new
clothes for him, for his old ones had been quite spoiled on his journey.
So Master Thumb stayed at home with his father and mother, in peace; for
though he had been so great a traveller, and had done and seen so many
fine things, and was fond enough of telling the whole story, he always
agreed that, after all, there’s no place like HOME!




RUMPELSTILTSKIN

By the side of a wood, in a country a long way off, ran a fine stream
of water; and upon the stream there stood a mill. The miller’s house was
close by, and the miller, you must know, had a very beautiful daughter.
She was, moreover, very shrewd and clever; and the miller was so proud
of her, that he one day told the king of the land, who used to come and
hunt in the wood, that his daughter could spin gold out of straw. Now
this king was very fond of money; and when he heard the miller’s boast
his greediness was raised, and he sent for the girl to be brought before
him. Then he led her to a chamber in his palace where there was a great
heap of straw, and gave her a spinning-wheel, and said, ‘All this must
be spun into gold before morning, as you love your life.’ It was in vain
that the poor maiden said that it was only a silly boast of her father,
for that she could do no such thing as spin straw into gold: the chamber
door was locked, and she was left alone.

She sat down in one corner of the room, and began to bewail her hard
fate; when on a sudden the door opened, and a droll-looking little man
hobbled in, and said, ‘Good morrow to you, my good lass; what are you
weeping for?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘I must spin this straw into gold, and
I know not how.’ ‘What will you give me,’ said the hobgoblin, ‘to do it
for you?’ ‘My necklace,’ replied the maiden. He took her at her word,
and sat himself down to the wheel, and whistled and sang:

 ‘Round about, round about,
    Lo and behold!
  Reel away, reel away,
    Straw into gold!’

And round about the wheel went merrily; the work was quickly done, and
the straw was all spun into gold.

When the king came and saw this, he was greatly astonished and pleased;
but his heart grew still more greedy of gain, and he shut up the poor
miller’s daughter again with a fresh task. Then she knew not what to do,
and sat down once more to weep; but the dwarf soon opened the door, and
said, ‘What will you give me to do your task?’ ‘The ring on my finger,’
said she. So her little friend took the ring, and began to work at the
wheel again, and whistled and sang:

 ‘Round about, round about,
    Lo and behold!
  Reel away, reel away,
    Straw into gold!’

till, long before morning, all was done again.

The king was greatly delighted to see all this glittering treasure;
but still he had not enough: so he took the miller’s daughter to a yet
larger heap, and said, ‘All this must be spun tonight; and if it is,
you shall be my queen.’ As soon as she was alone that dwarf came in, and
said, ‘What will you give me to spin gold for you this third time?’
‘I have nothing left,’ said she. ‘Then say you will give me,’ said
the little man, ‘the first little child that you may have when you are
queen.’ ‘That may never be,’ thought the miller’s daughter: and as she
knew no other way to get her task done, she said she would do what he
asked. Round went the wheel again to the old song, and the manikin once
more spun the heap into gold. The king came in the morning, and, finding
all he wanted, was forced to keep his word; so he married the miller’s
daughter, and she really became queen.

At the birth of her first little child she was very glad, and forgot the
dwarf, and what she had said. But one day he came into her room, where
she was sitting playing with her baby, and put her in mind of it. Then
she grieved sorely at her misfortune, and said she would give him all
the wealth of the kingdom if he would let her off, but in vain; till at
last her tears softened him, and he said, ‘I will give you three days’
grace, and if during that time you tell me my name, you shall keep your
child.’

Now the queen lay awake all night, thinking of all the odd names that
she had ever heard; and she sent messengers all over the land to find
out new ones. The next day the little man came, and she began with
TIMOTHY, ICHABOD, BENJAMIN, JEREMIAH, and all the names she could
remember; but to all and each of them he said, ‘Madam, that is not my
name.’

The second day she began with all the comical names she could hear of,
BANDY-LEGS, HUNCHBACK, CROOK-SHANKS, and so on; but the little gentleman
still said to every one of them, ‘Madam, that is not my name.’

The third day one of the messengers came back, and said, ‘I have
travelled two days without hearing of any other names; but yesterday, as
I was climbing a high hill, among the trees of the forest where the fox
and the hare bid each other good night, I saw a little hut; and before
the hut burnt a fire; and round about the fire a funny little dwarf was
dancing upon one leg, and singing:

 “Merrily the feast I’ll make.
  Today I’ll brew, tomorrow bake;
  Merrily I’ll dance and sing,
  For next day will a stranger bring.
  Little does my lady dream
  Rumpelstiltskin is my name!”

When the queen heard this she jumped for joy, and as soon as her little
friend came she sat down upon her throne, and called all her court round
to enjoy the fun; and the nurse stood by her side with the baby in her
arms, as if it was quite ready to be given up. Then the little man began
to chuckle at the thought of having the poor child, to take home with
him to his hut in the woods; and he cried out, ‘Now, lady, what is my
name?’ ‘Is it JOHN?’ asked she. ‘No, madam!’ ‘Is it TOM?’ ‘No, madam!’
‘Is it JEMMY?’ ‘It is not.’ ‘Can your name be RUMPELSTILTSKIN?’ said the
lady slyly. ‘Some witch told you that!--some witch told you that!’ cried
the little man, and dashed his right foot in a rage so deep into the
floor, that he was forced to lay hold of it with both hands to pull it
out.

Then he made the best of his way off, while the nurse laughed and the
baby crowed; and all the court jeered at him for having had so much
trouble for nothing, and said, ‘We wish you a very good morning, and a
merry feast, Mr RUMPLESTILTSKIN!’




CLEVER GRETEL

There was once a cook named Gretel, who wore shoes with red heels, and
when she walked out with them on, she turned herself this way and that,
was quite happy and thought: ‘You certainly are a pretty girl!’ And when
she came home she drank, in her gladness of heart, a draught of wine,
and as wine excites a desire to eat, she tasted the best of whatever she
was cooking until she was satisfied, and said: ‘The cook must know what
the food is like.’

It came to pass that the master one day said to her: ‘Gretel, there is a
guest coming this evening; prepare me two fowls very daintily.’ ‘I will
see to it, master,’ answered Gretel. She killed two fowls, scalded them,
plucked them, put them on the spit, and towards evening set them before
the fire, that they might roast. The fowls began to turn brown, and were
nearly ready, but the guest had not yet arrived. Then Gretel called out
to her master: ‘If the guest does not come, I must take the fowls away
from the fire, but it will be a sin and a shame if they are not eaten
the moment they are at their juiciest.’ The master said: ‘I will run
myself, and fetch the guest.’ When the master had turned his back,
Gretel laid the spit with the fowls on one side, and thought: ‘Standing
so long by the fire there, makes one sweat and thirsty; who knows
when they will come? Meanwhile, I will run into the cellar, and take a
drink.’ She ran down, set a jug, said: ‘God bless it for you, Gretel,’
and took a good drink, and thought that wine should flow on, and should
not be interrupted, and took yet another hearty draught.

Then she went and put the fowls down again to the fire, basted them,
and drove the spit merrily round. But as the roast meat smelt so good,
Gretel thought: ‘Something might be wrong, it ought to be tasted!’
She touched it with her finger, and said: ‘Ah! how good fowls are! It
certainly is a sin and a shame that they are not eaten at the right
time!’ She ran to the window, to see if the master was not coming with
his guest, but she saw no one, and went back to the fowls and thought:
‘One of the wings is burning! I had better take it off and eat it.’
So she cut it off, ate it, and enjoyed it, and when she had done, she
thought: ‘The other must go down too, or else master will observe that
something is missing.’ When the two wings were eaten, she went and
looked for her master, and did not see him. It suddenly occurred to
her: ‘Who knows? They are perhaps not coming at all, and have turned in
somewhere.’ Then she said: ‘Well, Gretel, enjoy yourself, one fowl has
been cut into, take another drink, and eat it up entirely; when it is
eaten you will have some peace, why should God’s good gifts be spoilt?’
So she ran into the cellar again, took an enormous drink and ate up the
one chicken in great glee. When one of the chickens was swallowed down,
and still her master did not come, Gretel looked at the other and said:
‘What one is, the other should be likewise, the two go together; what’s
right for the one is right for the other; I think if I were to take
another draught it would do me no harm.’ So she took another hearty
drink, and let the second chicken follow the first.

While she was making the most of it, her master came and cried: ‘Hurry
up, Gretel, the guest is coming directly after me!’ ‘Yes, sir, I will
soon serve up,’ answered Gretel. Meantime the master looked to see that
the table was properly laid, and took the great knife, wherewith he was
going to carve the chickens, and sharpened it on the steps. Presently
the guest came, and knocked politely and courteously at the house-door.
Gretel ran, and looked to see who was there, and when she saw the guest,
she put her finger to her lips and said: ‘Hush! hush! go away as quickly
as you can, if my master catches you it will be the worse for you; he
certainly did ask you to supper, but his intention is to cut off your
two ears. Just listen how he is sharpening the knife for it!’ The guest
heard the sharpening, and hurried down the steps again as fast as he
could. Gretel was not idle; she ran screaming to her master, and cried:
‘You have invited a fine guest!’ ‘Why, Gretel? What do you mean by
that?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘he has taken the chickens which I was just
going to serve up, off the dish, and has run away with them!’ ‘That’s a
nice trick!’ said her master, and lamented the fine chickens. ‘If he had
but left me one, so that something remained for me to eat.’ He called to
him to stop, but the guest pretended not to hear. Then he ran after him
with the knife still in his hand, crying: ‘Just one, just one,’ meaning
that the guest should leave him just one chicken, and not take both. The
guest, however, thought no otherwise than that he was to give up one of
his ears, and ran as if fire were burning under him, in order to take
them both with him.




THE OLD MAN AND HIS GRANDSON

There was once a very old man, whose eyes had become dim, his ears dull
of hearing, his knees trembled, and when he sat at table he could hardly
hold the spoon, and spilt the broth upon the table-cloth or let it run
out of his mouth. His son and his son’s wife were disgusted at this, so
the old grandfather at last had to sit in the corner behind the stove,
and they gave him his food in an earthenware bowl, and not even enough
of it. And he used to look towards the table with his eyes full of
tears. Once, too, his trembling hands could not hold the bowl, and it
fell to the ground and broke. The young wife scolded him, but he said
nothing and only sighed. Then they brought him a wooden bowl for a few
half-pence, out of which he had to eat.

They were once sitting thus when the little grandson of four years old
began to gather together some bits of wood upon the ground. ‘What are
you doing there?’ asked the father. ‘I am making a little trough,’
answered the child, ‘for father and mother to eat out of when I am big.’

The man and his wife looked at each other for a while, and presently
began to cry. Then they took the old grandfather to the table, and
henceforth always let him eat with them, and likewise said nothing if he
did spill a little of anything.




THE LITTLE PEASANT

There was a certain village wherein no one lived but really rich
peasants, and just one poor one, whom they called the little peasant. He
had not even so much as a cow, and still less money to buy one, and
yet he and his wife did so wish to have one. One day he said to her:
‘Listen, I have a good idea, there is our gossip the carpenter, he shall
make us a wooden calf, and paint it brown, so that it looks like any
other, and in time it will certainly get big and be a cow.’ the woman
also liked the idea, and their gossip the carpenter cut and planed
the calf, and painted it as it ought to be, and made it with its head
hanging down as if it were eating.

Next morning when the cows were being driven out, the little peasant
called the cow-herd in and said: ‘Look, I have a little calf there,
but it is still small and has to be carried.’ The cow-herd said: ‘All
right,’ and took it in his arms and carried it to the pasture, and set
it among the grass. The little calf always remained standing like one
which was eating, and the cow-herd said: ‘It will soon run by itself,
just look how it eats already!’ At night when he was going to drive the
herd home again, he said to the calf: ‘If you can stand there and eat
your fill, you can also go on your four legs; I don’t care to drag you
home again in my arms.’ But the little peasant stood at his door, and
waited for his little calf, and when the cow-herd drove the cows through
the village, and the calf was missing, he inquired where it was. The
cow-herd answered: ‘It is still standing out there eating. It would not
stop and come with us.’ But the little peasant said: ‘Oh, but I must
have my beast back again.’ Then they went back to the meadow together,
but someone had stolen the calf, and it was gone. The cow-herd said: ‘It
must have run away.’ The peasant, however, said: ‘Don’t tell me
that,’ and led the cow-herd before the mayor, who for his carelessness
condemned him to give the peasant a cow for the calf which had run away.

And now the little peasant and his wife had the cow for which they had
so long wished, and they were heartily glad, but they had no food for
it, and could give it nothing to eat, so it soon had to be killed. They
salted the flesh, and the peasant went into the town and wanted to sell
the skin there, so that he might buy a new calf with the proceeds. On
the way he passed by a mill, and there sat a raven with broken wings,
and out of pity he took him and wrapped him in the skin. But as the
weather grew so bad and there was a storm of rain and wind, he could
go no farther, and turned back to the mill and begged for shelter. The
miller’s wife was alone in the house, and said to the peasant: ‘Lay
yourself on the straw there,’ and gave him a slice of bread and cheese.
The peasant ate it, and lay down with his skin beside him, and the woman
thought: ‘He is tired and has gone to sleep.’ In the meantime came the
parson; the miller’s wife received him well, and said: ‘My husband is
out, so we will have a feast.’ The peasant listened, and when he heard
them talk about feasting he was vexed that he had been forced to make
shift with a slice of bread and cheese. Then the woman served up four
different things, roast meat, salad, cakes, and wine.

Just as they were about to sit down and eat, there was a knocking
outside. The woman said: ‘Oh, heavens! It is my husband!’ she quickly
hid the roast meat inside the tiled stove, the wine under the pillow,
the salad on the bed, the cakes under it, and the parson in the closet
on the porch. Then she opened the door for her husband, and said: ‘Thank
heaven, you are back again! There is such a storm, it looks as if the
world were coming to an end.’ The miller saw the peasant lying on the
straw, and asked, ‘What is that fellow doing there?’ ‘Ah,’ said the
wife, ‘the poor knave came in the storm and rain, and begged for
shelter, so I gave him a bit of bread and cheese, and showed him where
the straw was.’ The man said: ‘I have no objection, but be quick and get
me something to eat.’ The woman said: ‘But I have nothing but bread and
cheese.’ ‘I am contented with anything,’ replied the husband, ‘so far as
I am concerned, bread and cheese will do,’ and looked at the peasant and
said: ‘Come and eat some more with me.’ The peasant did not require to
be invited twice, but got up and ate. After this the miller saw the skin
in which the raven was, lying on the ground, and asked: ‘What have you
there?’ The peasant answered: ‘I have a soothsayer inside it.’ ‘Can
he foretell anything to me?’ said the miller. ‘Why not?’ answered
the peasant: ‘but he only says four things, and the fifth he keeps to
himself.’ The miller was curious, and said: ‘Let him foretell something
for once.’ Then the peasant pinched the raven’s head, so that he croaked
and made a noise like krr, krr. The miller said: ‘What did he say?’ The
peasant answered: ‘In the first place, he says that there is some wine
hidden under the pillow.’ ‘Bless me!’ cried the miller, and went there
and found the wine. ‘Now go on,’ said he. The peasant made the raven
croak again, and said: ‘In the second place, he says that there is some
roast meat in the tiled stove.’ ‘Upon my word!’ cried the miller, and
went thither, and found the roast meat. The peasant made the raven
prophesy still more, and said: ‘Thirdly, he says that there is some
salad on the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the miller, and
went there and found the salad. At last the peasant pinched the raven
once more till he croaked, and said: ‘Fourthly, he says that there
are some cakes under the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the
miller, and looked there, and found the cakes.

And now the two sat down to the table together, but the miller’s wife
was frightened to death, and went to bed and took all the keys with
her. The miller would have liked much to know the fifth, but the little
peasant said: ‘First, we will quickly eat the four things, for the fifth
is something bad.’ So they ate, and after that they bargained how much
the miller was to give for the fifth prophecy, until they agreed on
three hundred talers. Then the peasant once more pinched the raven’s
head till he croaked loudly. The miller asked: ‘What did he say?’ The
peasant replied: ‘He says that the Devil is hiding outside there in
the closet on the porch.’ The miller said: ‘The Devil must go out,’ and
opened the house-door; then the woman was forced to give up the keys,
and the peasant unlocked the closet. The parson ran out as fast as he
could, and the miller said: ‘It was true; I saw the black rascal with my
own eyes.’ The peasant, however, made off next morning by daybreak with
the three hundred talers.

At home the small peasant gradually launched out; he built a beautiful
house, and the peasants said: ‘The small peasant has certainly been to
the place where golden snow falls, and people carry the gold home in
shovels.’ Then the small peasant was brought before the mayor, and
bidden to say from whence his wealth came. He answered: ‘I sold my cow’s
skin in the town, for three hundred talers.’ When the peasants heard
that, they too wished to enjoy this great profit, and ran home, killed
all their cows, and stripped off their skins in order to sell them in
the town to the greatest advantage. The mayor, however, said: ‘But my
servant must go first.’ When she came to the merchant in the town, he
did not give her more than two talers for a skin, and when the others
came, he did not give them so much, and said: ‘What can I do with all
these skins?’

Then the peasants were vexed that the small peasant should have thus
outwitted them, wanted to take vengeance on him, and accused him of this
treachery before the mayor. The innocent little peasant was unanimously
sentenced to death, and was to be rolled into the water, in a barrel
pierced full of holes. He was led forth, and a priest was brought who
was to say a mass for his soul. The others were all obliged to retire to
a distance, and when the peasant looked at the priest, he recognized the
man who had been with the miller’s wife. He said to him: ‘I set you free
from the closet, set me free from the barrel.’ At this same moment up
came, with a flock of sheep, the very shepherd whom the peasant knew had
long been wishing to be mayor, so he cried with all his might: ‘No, I
will not do it; if the whole world insists on it, I will not do it!’ The
shepherd hearing that, came up to him, and asked: ‘What are you about?
What is it that you will not do?’ The peasant said: ‘They want to make
me mayor, if I will but put myself in the barrel, but I will not do it.’
The shepherd said: ‘If nothing more than that is needful in order to be
mayor, I would get into the barrel at once.’ The peasant said: ‘If you
will get in, you will be mayor.’ The shepherd was willing, and got in,
and the peasant shut the top down on him; then he took the shepherd’s
flock for himself, and drove it away. The parson went to the crowd,
and declared that the mass had been said. Then they came and rolled the
barrel towards the water. When the barrel began to roll, the shepherd
cried: ‘I am quite willing to be mayor.’ They believed no otherwise than
that it was the peasant who was saying this, and answered: ‘That is
what we intend, but first you shall look about you a little down below
there,’ and they rolled the barrel down into the water.

After that the peasants went home, and as they were entering the
village, the small peasant also came quietly in, driving a flock of
sheep and looking quite contented. Then the peasants were astonished,
and said: ‘Peasant, from whence do you come? Have you come out of the
water?’ ‘Yes, truly,’ replied the peasant, ‘I sank deep, deep down,
until at last I got to the bottom; I pushed the bottom out of the
barrel, and crept out, and there were pretty meadows on which a number
of lambs were feeding, and from thence I brought this flock away with
me.’ Said the peasants: ‘Are there any more there?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ said he,
‘more than I could want.’ Then the peasants made up their minds that
they too would fetch some sheep for themselves, a flock apiece, but the
mayor said: ‘I come first.’ So they went to the water together, and just
then there were some of the small fleecy clouds in the blue sky, which
are called little lambs, and they were reflected in the water, whereupon
the peasants cried: ‘We already see the sheep down below!’ The mayor
pressed forward and said: ‘I will go down first, and look about me, and
if things promise well I’ll call you.’ So he jumped in; splash! went
the water; it sounded as if he were calling them, and the whole crowd
plunged in after him as one man. Then the entire village was dead, and
the small peasant, as sole heir, became a rich man.




FREDERICK AND CATHERINE

There was once a man called Frederick: he had a wife whose name was
Catherine, and they had not long been married. One day Frederick said.
‘Kate! I am going to work in the fields; when I come back I shall be
hungry so let me have something nice cooked, and a good draught of ale.’
‘Very well,’ said she, ‘it shall all be ready.’ When dinner-time drew
nigh, Catherine took a nice steak, which was all the meat she had, and
put it on the fire to fry. The steak soon began to look brown, and to
crackle in the pan; and Catherine stood by with a fork and turned it:
then she said to herself, ‘The steak is almost ready, I may as well go
to the cellar for the ale.’ So she left the pan on the fire and took a
large jug and went into the cellar and tapped the ale cask. The beer ran
into the jug and Catherine stood looking on. At last it popped into her
head, ‘The dog is not shut up--he may be running away with the steak;
that’s well thought of.’ So up she ran from the cellar; and sure enough
the rascally cur had got the steak in his mouth, and was making off with
it.

Away ran Catherine, and away ran the dog across the field: but he ran
faster than she, and stuck close to the steak. ‘It’s all gone, and “what
can’t be cured must be endured”,’ said Catherine. So she turned round;
and as she had run a good way and was tired, she walked home leisurely
to cool herself.

Now all this time the ale was running too, for Catherine had not turned
the cock; and when the jug was full the liquor ran upon the floor till
the cask was empty. When she got to the cellar stairs she saw what had
happened. ‘My stars!’ said she, ‘what shall I do to keep Frederick from
seeing all this slopping about?’ So she thought a while; and at last
remembered that there was a sack of fine meal bought at the last fair,
and that if she sprinkled this over the floor it would suck up the ale
nicely. ‘What a lucky thing,’ said she, ‘that we kept that meal! we have
now a good use for it.’ So away she went for it: but she managed to set
it down just upon the great jug full of beer, and upset it; and thus
all the ale that had been saved was set swimming on the floor also. ‘Ah!
well,’ said she, ‘when one goes another may as well follow.’ Then she
strewed the meal all about the cellar, and was quite pleased with her
cleverness, and said, ‘How very neat and clean it looks!’

At noon Frederick came home. ‘Now, wife,’ cried he, ‘what have you for
dinner?’ ‘O Frederick!’ answered she, ‘I was cooking you a steak; but
while I went down to draw the ale, the dog ran away with it; and while
I ran after him, the ale ran out; and when I went to dry up the ale
with the sack of meal that we got at the fair, I upset the jug: but the
cellar is now quite dry, and looks so clean!’ ‘Kate, Kate,’ said he,
‘how could you do all this?’ Why did you leave the steak to fry, and the
ale to run, and then spoil all the meal?’ ‘Why, Frederick,’ said she, ‘I
did not know I was doing wrong; you should have told me before.’

The husband thought to himself, ‘If my wife manages matters thus, I must
look sharp myself.’ Now he had a good deal of gold in the house: so he
said to Catherine, ‘What pretty yellow buttons these are! I shall put
them into a box and bury them in the garden; but take care that you
never go near or meddle with them.’ ‘No, Frederick,’ said she, ‘that
I never will.’ As soon as he was gone, there came by some pedlars with
earthenware plates and dishes, and they asked her whether she would buy.
‘Oh dear me, I should like to buy very much, but I have no money: if
you had any use for yellow buttons, I might deal with you.’ ‘Yellow
buttons!’ said they: ‘let us have a look at them.’ ‘Go into the garden
and dig where I tell you, and you will find the yellow buttons: I dare
not go myself.’ So the rogues went: and when they found what these
yellow buttons were, they took them all away, and left her plenty of
plates and dishes. Then she set them all about the house for a show:
and when Frederick came back, he cried out, ‘Kate, what have you been
doing?’ ‘See,’ said she, ‘I have bought all these with your yellow
buttons: but I did not touch them myself; the pedlars went themselves
and dug them up.’ ‘Wife, wife,’ said Frederick, ‘what a pretty piece of
work you have made! those yellow buttons were all my money: how came you
to do such a thing?’ ‘Why,’ answered she, ‘I did not know there was any
harm in it; you should have told me.’

Catherine stood musing for a while, and at last said to her husband,
‘Hark ye, Frederick, we will soon get the gold back: let us run after
the thieves.’ ‘Well, we will try,’ answered he; ‘but take some butter
and cheese with you, that we may have something to eat by the way.’
‘Very well,’ said she; and they set out: and as Frederick walked the
fastest, he left his wife some way behind. ‘It does not matter,’ thought
she: ‘when we turn back, I shall be so much nearer home than he.’

Presently she came to the top of a hill, down the side of which there
was a road so narrow that the cart wheels always chafed the trees
on each side as they passed. ‘Ah, see now,’ said she, ‘how they have
bruised and wounded those poor trees; they will never get well.’ So she
took pity on them, and made use of the butter to grease them all, so
that the wheels might not hurt them so much. While she was doing this
kind office one of her cheeses fell out of the basket, and rolled down
the hill. Catherine looked, but could not see where it had gone; so she
said, ‘Well, I suppose the other will go the same way and find you; he
has younger legs than I have.’ Then she rolled the other cheese after
it; and away it went, nobody knows where, down the hill. But she said
she supposed that they knew the road, and would follow her, and she
could not stay there all day waiting for them.

At last she overtook Frederick, who desired her to give him something to
eat. Then she gave him the dry bread. ‘Where are the butter and cheese?’
said he. ‘Oh!’ answered she, ‘I used the butter to grease those poor
trees that the wheels chafed so: and one of the cheeses ran away so I
sent the other after it to find it, and I suppose they are both on
the road together somewhere.’ ‘What a goose you are to do such silly
things!’ said the husband. ‘How can you say so?’ said she; ‘I am sure
you never told me not.’

They ate the dry bread together; and Frederick said, ‘Kate, I hope you
locked the door safe when you came away.’ ‘No,’ answered she, ‘you did
not tell me.’ ‘Then go home, and do it now before we go any farther,’
said Frederick, ‘and bring with you something to eat.’

Catherine did as he told her, and thought to herself by the way,
‘Frederick wants something to eat; but I don’t think he is very fond of
butter and cheese: I’ll bring him a bag of fine nuts, and the vinegar,
for I have often seen him take some.’

When she reached home, she bolted the back door, but the front door she
took off the hinges, and said, ‘Frederick told me to lock the door, but
surely it can nowhere be so safe if I take it with me.’ So she took
her time by the way; and when she overtook her husband she cried
out, ‘There, Frederick, there is the door itself, you may watch it as
carefully as you please.’ ‘Alas! alas!’ said he, ‘what a clever wife I
have! I sent you to make the house fast, and you take the door away, so
that everybody may go in and out as they please--however, as you have
brought the door, you shall carry it about with you for your pains.’
‘Very well,’ answered she, ‘I’ll carry the door; but I’ll not carry the
nuts and vinegar bottle also--that would be too much of a load; so if
you please, I’ll fasten them to the door.’

Frederick of course made no objection to that plan, and they set off
into the wood to look for the thieves; but they could not find them: and
when it grew dark, they climbed up into a tree to spend the night there.
Scarcely were they up, than who should come by but the very rogues they
were looking for. They were in truth great rascals, and belonged to that
class of people who find things before they are lost; they were tired;
so they sat down and made a fire under the very tree where Frederick and
Catherine were. Frederick slipped down on the other side, and picked up
some stones. Then he climbed up again, and tried to hit the thieves on
the head with them: but they only said, ‘It must be near morning, for
the wind shakes the fir-apples down.’

Catherine, who had the door on her shoulder, began to be very tired;
but she thought it was the nuts upon it that were so heavy: so she said
softly, ‘Frederick, I must let the nuts go.’ ‘No,’ answered he, ‘not
now, they will discover us.’ ‘I can’t help that: they must go.’ ‘Well,
then, make haste and throw them down, if you will.’ Then away rattled
the nuts down among the boughs and one of the thieves cried, ‘Bless me,
it is hailing.’

A little while after, Catherine thought the door was still very heavy:
so she whispered to Frederick, ‘I must throw the vinegar down.’ ‘Pray
don’t,’ answered he, ‘it will discover us.’ ‘I can’t help that,’ said
she, ‘go it must.’ So she poured all the vinegar down; and the thieves
said, ‘What a heavy dew there is!’

At last it popped into Catherine’s head that it was the door itself that
was so heavy all the time: so she whispered, ‘Frederick, I must throw
the door down soon.’ But he begged and prayed her not to do so, for he
was sure it would betray them. ‘Here goes, however,’ said she: and down
went the door with such a clatter upon the thieves, that they cried
out ‘Murder!’ and not knowing what was coming, ran away as fast as they
could, and left all the gold. So when Frederick and Catherine came down,
there they found all their money safe and sound.




SWEETHEART ROLAND

There was once upon a time a woman who was a real witch and had two
daughters, one ugly and wicked, and this one she loved because she was
her own daughter, and one beautiful and good, and this one she hated,
because she was her stepdaughter. The stepdaughter once had a pretty
apron, which the other fancied so much that she became envious, and
told her mother that she must and would have that apron. ‘Be quiet, my
child,’ said the old woman, ‘and you shall have it. Your stepsister has
long deserved death; tonight when she is asleep I will come and cut her
head off. Only be careful that you are at the far side of the bed, and
push her well to the front.’ It would have been all over with the poor
girl if she had not just then been standing in a corner, and heard
everything. All day long she dared not go out of doors, and when bedtime
had come, the witch’s daughter got into bed first, so as to lie at the
far side, but when she was asleep, the other pushed her gently to the
front, and took for herself the place at the back, close by the wall. In
the night, the old woman came creeping in, she held an axe in her right
hand, and felt with her left to see if anyone were lying at the outside,
and then she grasped the axe with both hands, and cut her own child’s
head off.

When she had gone away, the girl got up and went to her sweetheart, who
was called Roland, and knocked at his door. When he came out, she said
to him: ‘Listen, dearest Roland, we must fly in all haste; my stepmother
wanted to kill me, but has struck her own child. When daylight comes,
and she sees what she has done, we shall be lost.’ ‘But,’ said Roland,
‘I counsel you first to take away her magic wand, or we cannot escape
if she pursues us.’ The maiden fetched the magic wand, and she took the
dead girl’s head and dropped three drops of blood on the ground, one in
front of the bed, one in the kitchen, and one on the stairs. Then she
hurried away with her lover.

When the old witch got up next morning, she called her daughter, and
wanted to give her the apron, but she did not come. Then the witch
cried: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Here, on the stairs, I am sweeping,’ answered
the first drop of blood. The old woman went out, but saw no one on the
stairs, and cried again: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Here in the kitchen, I am
warming myself,’ cried the second drop of blood. She went into the
kitchen, but found no one. Then she cried again: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Ah,
here in the bed, I am sleeping,’ cried the third drop of blood. She went
into the room to the bed. What did she see there? Her own child,
whose head she had cut off, bathed in her blood. The witch fell into
a passion, sprang to the window, and as she could look forth quite far
into the world, she perceived her stepdaughter hurrying away with her
sweetheart Roland. ‘That shall not help you,’ cried she, ‘even if you
have got a long way off, you shall still not escape me.’ She put on her
many-league boots, in which she covered an hour’s walk at every step,
and it was not long before she overtook them. The girl, however, when
she saw the old woman striding towards her, changed, with her magic
wand, her sweetheart Roland into a lake, and herself into a duck
swimming in the middle of it. The witch placed herself on the shore,
threw breadcrumbs in, and went to endless trouble to entice the duck;
but the duck did not let herself be enticed, and the old woman had to
go home at night as she had come. At this the girl and her sweetheart
Roland resumed their natural shapes again, and they walked on the whole
night until daybreak. Then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful
flower which stood in the midst of a briar hedge, and her sweetheart
Roland into a fiddler. It was not long before the witch came striding up
towards them, and said to the musician: ‘Dear musician, may I pluck that
beautiful flower for myself?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘I will play to
you while you do it.’ As she was hastily creeping into the hedge and was
just going to pluck the flower, knowing perfectly well who the flower
was, he began to play, and whether she would or not, she was forced
to dance, for it was a magical dance. The faster he played, the more
violent springs was she forced to make, and the thorns tore her clothes
from her body, and pricked her and wounded her till she bled, and as he
did not stop, she had to dance till she lay dead on the ground.

As they were now set free, Roland said: ‘Now I will go to my father and
arrange for the wedding.’ ‘Then in the meantime I will stay here and
wait for you,’ said the girl, ‘and that no one may recognize me, I will
change myself into a red stone landmark.’ Then Roland went away, and the
girl stood like a red landmark in the field and waited for her beloved.
But when Roland got home, he fell into the snares of another, who so
fascinated him that he forgot the maiden. The poor girl remained there a
long time, but at length, as he did not return at all, she was sad, and
changed herself into a flower, and thought: ‘Someone will surely come
this way, and trample me down.’

It befell, however, that a shepherd kept his sheep in the field and saw
the flower, and as it was so pretty, plucked it, took it with him, and
laid it away in his chest. From that time forth, strange things happened
in the shepherd’s house. When he arose in the morning, all the work was
already done, the room was swept, the table and benches cleaned, the
fire in the hearth was lighted, and the water was fetched, and at noon,
when he came home, the table was laid, and a good dinner served. He
could not conceive how this came to pass, for he never saw a human being
in his house, and no one could have concealed himself in it. He was
certainly pleased with this good attendance, but still at last he was so
afraid that he went to a wise woman and asked for her advice. The wise
woman said: ‘There is some enchantment behind it, listen very early some
morning if anything is moving in the room, and if you see anything, no
matter what it is, throw a white cloth over it, and then the magic will
be stopped.’

The shepherd did as she bade him, and next morning just as day dawned,
he saw the chest open, and the flower come out. Swiftly he
sprang towards it, and threw a white cloth over it. Instantly the
transformation came to an end, and a beautiful girl stood before him,
who admitted to him that she had been the flower, and that up to this
time she had attended to his house-keeping. She told him her story,
and as she pleased him he asked her if she would marry him, but she
answered: ‘No,’ for she wanted to remain faithful to her sweetheart
Roland, although he had deserted her. Nevertheless, she promised not to
go away, but to continue keeping house for the shepherd.

And now the time drew near when Roland’s wedding was to be celebrated,
and then, according to an old custom in the country, it was announced
that all the girls were to be present at it, and sing in honour of the
bridal pair. When the faithful maiden heard of this, she grew so sad
that she thought her heart would break, and she would not go thither,
but the other girls came and took her. When it came to her turn to sing,
she stepped back, until at last she was the only one left, and then she
could not refuse. But when she began her song, and it reached Roland’s
ears, he sprang up and cried: ‘I know the voice, that is the true
bride, I will have no other!’ Everything he had forgotten, and which had
vanished from his mind, had suddenly come home again to his heart. Then
the faithful maiden held her wedding with her sweetheart Roland, and
grief came to an end and joy began.




SNOWDROP

It was the middle of winter, when the broad flakes of snow were falling
around, that the queen of a country many thousand miles off sat working
at her window. The frame of the window was made of fine black ebony, and
as she sat looking out upon the snow, she pricked her finger, and three
drops of blood fell upon it. Then she gazed thoughtfully upon the red
drops that sprinkled the white snow, and said, ‘Would that my little
daughter may be as white as that snow, as red as that blood, and as
black as this ebony windowframe!’ And so the little girl really did grow
up; her skin was as white as snow, her cheeks as rosy as the blood, and
her hair as black as ebony; and she was called Snowdrop.

But this queen died; and the king soon married another wife, who became
queen, and was very beautiful, but so vain that she could not bear
to think that anyone could be handsomer than she was. She had a fairy
looking-glass, to which she used to go, and then she would gaze upon
herself in it, and say:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass had always answered:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all the land.’

But Snowdrop grew more and more beautiful; and when she was seven years
old she was as bright as the day, and fairer than the queen herself.
Then the glass one day answered the queen, when she went to look in it
as usual:

 ‘Thou, queen, art fair, and beauteous to see,
  But Snowdrop is lovelier far than thee!’

When she heard this she turned pale with rage and envy, and called to
one of her servants, and said, ‘Take Snowdrop away into the wide wood,
that I may never see her any more.’ Then the servant led her away; but
his heart melted when Snowdrop begged him to spare her life, and he
said, ‘I will not hurt you, thou pretty child.’ So he left her by
herself; and though he thought it most likely that the wild beasts would
tear her in pieces, he felt as if a great weight were taken off his
heart when he had made up his mind not to kill her but to leave her to
her fate, with the chance of someone finding and saving her.

Then poor Snowdrop wandered along through the wood in great fear; and
the wild beasts roared about her, but none did her any harm. In the
evening she came to a cottage among the hills, and went in to rest, for
her little feet would carry her no further. Everything was spruce and
neat in the cottage: on the table was spread a white cloth, and there
were seven little plates, seven little loaves, and seven little glasses
with wine in them; and seven knives and forks laid in order; and by
the wall stood seven little beds. As she was very hungry, she picked
a little piece of each loaf and drank a very little wine out of each
glass; and after that she thought she would lie down and rest. So she
tried all the little beds; but one was too long, and another was too
short, till at last the seventh suited her: and there she laid herself
down and went to sleep.

By and by in came the masters of the cottage. Now they were seven little
dwarfs, that lived among the mountains, and dug and searched for gold.
They lighted up their seven lamps, and saw at once that all was not
right. The first said, ‘Who has been sitting on my stool?’ The second,
‘Who has been eating off my plate?’ The third, ‘Who has been picking my
bread?’ The fourth, ‘Who has been meddling with my spoon?’ The fifth,
‘Who has been handling my fork?’ The sixth, ‘Who has been cutting with
my knife?’ The seventh, ‘Who has been drinking my wine?’ Then the first
looked round and said, ‘Who has been lying on my bed?’ And the rest came
running to him, and everyone cried out that somebody had been upon his
bed. But the seventh saw Snowdrop, and called all his brethren to come
and see her; and they cried out with wonder and astonishment and brought
their lamps to look at her, and said, ‘Good heavens! what a lovely child
she is!’ And they were very glad to see her, and took care not to wake
her; and the seventh dwarf slept an hour with each of the other dwarfs
in turn, till the night was gone.

In the morning Snowdrop told them all her story; and they pitied her,
and said if she would keep all things in order, and cook and wash and
knit and spin for them, she might stay where she was, and they would
take good care of her. Then they went out all day long to their work,
seeking for gold and silver in the mountains: but Snowdrop was left at
home; and they warned her, and said, ‘The queen will soon find out where
you are, so take care and let no one in.’

But the queen, now that she thought Snowdrop was dead, believed that she
must be the handsomest lady in the land; and she went to her glass and
said:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass answered:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all this land:
  But over the hills, in the greenwood shade,
  Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made,
  There Snowdrop is hiding her head; and she
  Is lovelier far, O queen! than thee.’

Then the queen was very much frightened; for she knew that the glass
always spoke the truth, and was sure that the servant had betrayed her.
And she could not bear to think that anyone lived who was more beautiful
than she was; so she dressed herself up as an old pedlar, and went
her way over the hills, to the place where the dwarfs dwelt. Then she
knocked at the door, and cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ Snowdrop looked
out at the window, and said, ‘Good day, good woman! what have you to
sell?’ ‘Good wares, fine wares,’ said she; ‘laces and bobbins of all
colours.’ ‘I will let the old lady in; she seems to be a very good
sort of body,’ thought Snowdrop, as she ran down and unbolted the door.
‘Bless me!’ said the old woman, ‘how badly your stays are laced! Let me
lace them up with one of my nice new laces.’ Snowdrop did not dream of
any mischief; so she stood before the old woman; but she set to work
so nimbly, and pulled the lace so tight, that Snowdrop’s breath was
stopped, and she fell down as if she were dead. ‘There’s an end to all
thy beauty,’ said the spiteful queen, and went away home.

In the evening the seven dwarfs came home; and I need not say how
grieved they were to see their faithful Snowdrop stretched out upon the
ground, as if she was quite dead. However, they lifted her up, and when
they found what ailed her, they cut the lace; and in a little time she
began to breathe, and very soon came to life again. Then they said, ‘The
old woman was the queen herself; take care another time, and let no one
in when we are away.’

When the queen got home, she went straight to her glass, and spoke to it
as before; but to her great grief it still said:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all this land:
  But over the hills, in the greenwood shade,
  Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made,
  There Snowdrop is hiding her head; and she
  Is lovelier far, O queen! than thee.’

Then the blood ran cold in her heart with spite and malice, to see that
Snowdrop still lived; and she dressed herself up again, but in quite
another dress from the one she wore before, and took with her a poisoned
comb. When she reached the dwarfs’ cottage, she knocked at the door, and
cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ But Snowdrop said, ‘I dare not let anyone
in.’ Then the queen said, ‘Only look at my beautiful combs!’ and gave
her the poisoned one. And it looked so pretty, that she took it up and
put it into her hair to try it; but the moment it touched her head,
the poison was so powerful that she fell down senseless. ‘There you may
lie,’ said the queen, and went her way. But by good luck the dwarfs
came in very early that evening; and when they saw Snowdrop lying on
the ground, they thought what had happened, and soon found the poisoned
comb. And when they took it away she got well, and told them all that
had passed; and they warned her once more not to open the door to
anyone.

Meantime the queen went home to her glass, and shook with rage when she
read the very same answer as before; and she said, ‘Snowdrop shall die,
if it cost me my life.’ So she went by herself into her chamber, and got
ready a poisoned apple: the outside looked very rosy and tempting, but
whoever tasted it was sure to die. Then she dressed herself up as a
peasant’s wife, and travelled over the hills to the dwarfs’ cottage,
and knocked at the door; but Snowdrop put her head out of the window and
said, ‘I dare not let anyone in, for the dwarfs have told me not.’ ‘Do
as you please,’ said the old woman, ‘but at any rate take this pretty
apple; I will give it you.’ ‘No,’ said Snowdrop, ‘I dare not take it.’
‘You silly girl!’ answered the other, ‘what are you afraid of? Do you
think it is poisoned? Come! do you eat one part, and I will eat the
other.’ Now the apple was so made up that one side was good, though the
other side was poisoned. Then Snowdrop was much tempted to taste, for
the apple looked so very nice; and when she saw the old woman eat, she
could wait no longer. But she had scarcely put the piece into her mouth,
when she fell down dead upon the ground. ‘This time nothing will save
thee,’ said the queen; and she went home to her glass, and at last it
said:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest of all the fair.’

And then her wicked heart was glad, and as happy as such a heart could
be.

When evening came, and the dwarfs had gone home, they found Snowdrop
lying on the ground: no breath came from her lips, and they were afraid
that she was quite dead. They lifted her up, and combed her hair, and
washed her face with wine and water; but all was in vain, for the little
girl seemed quite dead. So they laid her down upon a bier, and all seven
watched and bewailed her three whole days; and then they thought they
would bury her: but her cheeks were still rosy; and her face looked just
as it did while she was alive; so they said, ‘We will never bury her in
the cold ground.’ And they made a coffin of glass, so that they might
still look at her, and wrote upon it in golden letters what her name
was, and that she was a king’s daughter. And the coffin was set among
the hills, and one of the dwarfs always sat by it and watched. And the
birds of the air came too, and bemoaned Snowdrop; and first of all came
an owl, and then a raven, and at last a dove, and sat by her side.

And thus Snowdrop lay for a long, long time, and still only looked as
though she was asleep; for she was even now as white as snow, and as red
as blood, and as black as ebony. At last a prince came and called at the
dwarfs’ house; and he saw Snowdrop, and read what was written in golden
letters. Then he offered the dwarfs money, and prayed and besought them
to let him take her away; but they said, ‘We will not part with her for
all the gold in the world.’ At last, however, they had pity on him, and
gave him the coffin; but the moment he lifted it up to carry it home
with him, the piece of apple fell from between her lips, and Snowdrop
awoke, and said, ‘Where am I?’ And the prince said, ‘Thou art quite safe
with me.’

Then he told her all that had happened, and said, ‘I love you far better
than all the world; so come with me to my father’s palace, and you shall
be my wife.’ And Snowdrop consented, and went home with the prince;
and everything was got ready with great pomp and splendour for their
wedding.

To the feast was asked, among the rest, Snowdrop’s old enemy the queen;
and as she was dressing herself in fine rich clothes, she looked in the
glass and said:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass answered:

 ‘Thou, lady, art loveliest here, I ween;
  But lovelier far is the new-made queen.’

When she heard this she started with rage; but her envy and curiosity
were so great, that she could not help setting out to see the bride. And
when she got there, and saw that it was no other than Snowdrop, who, as
she thought, had been dead a long while, she choked with rage, and fell
down and died: but Snowdrop and the prince lived and reigned happily
over that land many, many years; and sometimes they went up into the
mountains, and paid a visit to the little dwarfs, who had been so kind
to Snowdrop in her time of need.




THE PINK

There was once upon a time a queen to whom God had given no children.
Every morning she went into the garden and prayed to God in heaven to
bestow on her a son or a daughter. Then an angel from heaven came to her
and said: ‘Be at rest, you shall have a son with the power of wishing,
so that whatsoever in the world he wishes for, that shall he have.’ Then
she went to the king, and told him the joyful tidings, and when the time
was come she gave birth to a son, and the king was filled with gladness.

Every morning she went with the child to the garden where the wild
beasts were kept, and washed herself there in a clear stream. It
happened once when the child was a little older, that it was lying in
her arms and she fell asleep. Then came the old cook, who knew that the
child had the power of wishing, and stole it away, and he took a hen,
and cut it in pieces, and dropped some of its blood on the queen’s apron
and on her dress. Then he carried the child away to a secret place,
where a nurse was obliged to suckle it, and he ran to the king and
accused the queen of having allowed her child to be taken from her by
the wild beasts. When the king saw the blood on her apron, he believed
this, fell into such a passion that he ordered a high tower to be built,
in which neither sun nor moon could be seen and had his wife put into
it, and walled up. Here she was to stay for seven years without meat
or drink, and die of hunger. But God sent two angels from heaven in the
shape of white doves, which flew to her twice a day, and carried her
food until the seven years were over.

The cook, however, thought to himself: ‘If the child has the power of
wishing, and I am here, he might very easily get me into trouble.’ So
he left the palace and went to the boy, who was already big enough to
speak, and said to him: ‘Wish for a beautiful palace for yourself with
a garden, and all else that pertains to it.’ Scarcely were the words out
of the boy’s mouth, when everything was there that he had wished for.
After a while the cook said to him: ‘It is not well for you to be so
alone, wish for a pretty girl as a companion.’ Then the king’s son
wished for one, and she immediately stood before him, and was more
beautiful than any painter could have painted her. The two played
together, and loved each other with all their hearts, and the old cook
went out hunting like a nobleman. The thought occurred to him, however,
that the king’s son might some day wish to be with his father, and thus
bring him into great peril. So he went out and took the maiden aside,
and said: ‘Tonight when the boy is asleep, go to his bed and plunge this
knife into his heart, and bring me his heart and tongue, and if you do
not do it, you shall lose your life.’ Thereupon he went away, and when
he returned next day she had not done it, and said: ‘Why should I shed
the blood of an innocent boy who has never harmed anyone?’ The cook once
more said: ‘If you do not do it, it shall cost you your own life.’ When
he had gone away, she had a little hind brought to her, and ordered her
to be killed, and took her heart and tongue, and laid them on a plate,
and when she saw the old man coming, she said to the boy: ‘Lie down in
your bed, and draw the clothes over you.’ Then the wicked wretch came in
and said: ‘Where are the boy’s heart and tongue?’ The girl reached the
plate to him, but the king’s son threw off the quilt, and said: ‘You old
sinner, why did you want to kill me? Now will I pronounce thy sentence.
You shall become a black poodle and have a gold collar round your neck,
and shall eat burning coals, till the flames burst forth from your
throat.’ And when he had spoken these words, the old man was changed
into a poodle dog, and had a gold collar round his neck, and the cooks
were ordered to bring up some live coals, and these he ate, until the
flames broke forth from his throat. The king’s son remained there a
short while longer, and he thought of his mother, and wondered if she
were still alive. At length he said to the maiden: ‘I will go home to my
own country; if you will go with me, I will provide for you.’ ‘Ah,’
she replied, ‘the way is so long, and what shall I do in a strange land
where I am unknown?’ As she did not seem quite willing, and as they
could not be parted from each other, he wished that she might be changed
into a beautiful pink, and took her with him. Then he went away to his
own country, and the poodle had to run after him. He went to the tower
in which his mother was confined, and as it was so high, he wished for
a ladder which would reach up to the very top. Then he mounted up and
looked inside, and cried: ‘Beloved mother, Lady Queen, are you still
alive, or are you dead?’ She answered: ‘I have just eaten, and am still
satisfied,’ for she thought the angels were there. Said he: ‘I am your
dear son, whom the wild beasts were said to have torn from your arms;
but I am alive still, and will soon set you free.’ Then he descended
again, and went to his father, and caused himself to be announced as a
strange huntsman, and asked if he could offer him service. The king said
yes, if he was skilful and could get game for him, he should come to
him, but that deer had never taken up their quarters in any part of the
district or country. Then the huntsman promised to procure as much game
for him as he could possibly use at the royal table. So he summoned all
the huntsmen together, and bade them go out into the forest with him.
And he went with them and made them form a great circle, open at one end
where he stationed himself, and began to wish. Two hundred deer and more
came running inside the circle at once, and the huntsmen shot them.
Then they were all placed on sixty country carts, and driven home to the
king, and for once he was able to deck his table with game, after having
had none at all for years.

Now the king felt great joy at this, and commanded that his entire
household should eat with him next day, and made a great feast. When
they were all assembled together, he said to the huntsman: ‘As you are
so clever, you shall sit by me.’ He replied: ‘Lord King, your majesty
must excuse me, I am a poor huntsman.’ But the king insisted on it,
and said: ‘You shall sit by me,’ until he did it. Whilst he was sitting
there, he thought of his dearest mother, and wished that one of the
king’s principal servants would begin to speak of her, and would ask how
it was faring with the queen in the tower, and if she were alive still,
or had perished. Hardly had he formed the wish than the marshal began,
and said: ‘Your majesty, we live joyously here, but how is the queen
living in the tower? Is she still alive, or has she died?’ But the king
replied: ‘She let my dear son be torn to pieces by wild beasts; I will
not have her named.’ Then the huntsman arose and said: ‘Gracious lord
father she is alive still, and I am her son, and I was not carried away
by wild beasts, but by that wretch the old cook, who tore me from her
arms when she was asleep, and sprinkled her apron with the blood of a
chicken.’ Thereupon he took the dog with the golden collar, and said:
‘That is the wretch!’ and caused live coals to be brought, and these the
dog was compelled to devour before the sight of all, until flames burst
forth from its throat. On this the huntsman asked the king if he would
like to see the dog in his true shape, and wished him back into the form
of the cook, in which he stood immediately, with his white apron,
and his knife by his side. When the king saw him he fell into a passion,
and ordered him to be cast into the deepest dungeon. Then the huntsman
spoke further and said: ‘Father, will you see the maiden who brought me
up so tenderly and who was afterwards to murder me, but did not do it,
though her own life depended on it?’ The king replied: ‘Yes, I would
like to see her.’ The son said: ‘Most gracious father, I will show her
to you in the form of a beautiful flower,’ and he thrust his hand into
his pocket and brought forth the pink, and placed it on the royal table,
and it was so beautiful that the king had never seen one to equal it.
Then the son said: ‘Now will I show her to you in her own form,’ and
wished that she might become a maiden, and she stood there looking so
beautiful that no painter could have made her look more so.

And the king sent two waiting-maids and two attendants into the tower,
to fetch the queen and bring her to the royal table. But when she was
led in she ate nothing, and said: ‘The gracious and merciful God who has
supported me in the tower, will soon set me free.’ She lived three days
more, and then died happily, and when she was buried, the two white
doves which had brought her food to the tower, and were angels of
heaven, followed her body and seated themselves on her grave. The aged
king ordered the cook to be torn in four pieces, but grief consumed the
king’s own heart, and he soon died. His son married the beautiful maiden
whom he had brought with him as a flower in his pocket, and whether they
are still alive or not, is known to God.




CLEVER ELSIE

There was once a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Elsie. And
when she had grown up her father said: ‘We will get her married.’ ‘Yes,’
said the mother, ‘if only someone would come who would have her.’ At
length a man came from a distance and wooed her, who was called Hans;
but he stipulated that Clever Elsie should be really smart. ‘Oh,’ said
the father, ‘she has plenty of good sense’; and the mother said: ‘Oh,
she can see the wind coming up the street, and hear the flies coughing.’
‘Well,’ said Hans, ‘if she is not really smart, I won’t have her.’ When
they were sitting at dinner and had eaten, the mother said: ‘Elsie, go
into the cellar and fetch some beer.’ Then Clever Elsie took the pitcher
from the wall, went into the cellar, and tapped the lid briskly as she
went, so that the time might not appear long. When she was below she
fetched herself a chair, and set it before the barrel so that she had
no need to stoop, and did not hurt her back or do herself any unexpected
injury. Then she placed the can before her, and turned the tap, and
while the beer was running she would not let her eyes be idle, but
looked up at the wall, and after much peering here and there, saw a
pick-axe exactly above her, which the masons had accidentally left
there.

Then Clever Elsie began to weep and said: ‘If I get Hans, and we have
a child, and he grows big, and we send him into the cellar here to draw
beer, then the pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then she
sat and wept and screamed with all the strength of her body, over the
misfortune which lay before her. Those upstairs waited for the drink,
but Clever Elsie still did not come. Then the woman said to the servant:
‘Just go down into the cellar and see where Elsie is.’ The maid went and
found her sitting in front of the barrel, screaming loudly. ‘Elsie why
do you weep?’ asked the maid. ‘Ah,’ she answered, ‘have I not reason to
weep? If I get Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to
draw beer here, the pick-axe will perhaps fall on his head, and kill
him.’ Then said the maid: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down
beside her and began loudly to weep over the misfortune. After a while,
as the maid did not come back, and those upstairs were thirsty for the
beer, the man said to the boy: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see
where Elsie and the girl are.’ The boy went down, and there sat Clever
Elsie and the girl both weeping together. Then he asked: ‘Why are you
weeping?’ ‘Ah,’ said Elsie, ‘have I not reason to weep? If I get Hans,
and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the
pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then said the boy: ‘What
a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down by her, and likewise began to
howl loudly. Upstairs they waited for the boy, but as he still did not
return, the man said to the woman: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see
where Elsie is!’ The woman went down, and found all three in the midst
of their lamentations, and inquired what was the cause; then Elsie told
her also that her future child was to be killed by the pick-axe, when it
grew big and had to draw beer, and the pick-axe fell down. Then said the
mother likewise: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down and wept
with them. The man upstairs waited a short time, but as his wife did not
come back and his thirst grew ever greater, he said: ‘I must go into the
cellar myself and see where Elsie is.’ But when he got into the cellar,
and they were all sitting together crying, and he heard the reason, and
that Elsie’s child was the cause, and the Elsie might perhaps bring one
into the world some day, and that he might be killed by the pick-axe, if
he should happen to be sitting beneath it, drawing beer just at the very
time when it fell down, he cried: ‘Oh, what a clever Elsie!’ and sat
down, and likewise wept with them. The bridegroom stayed upstairs alone
for a long time; then as no one would come back he thought: ‘They must be
waiting for me below: I too must go there and see what they are about.’
When he got down, the five of them were sitting screaming and lamenting
quite piteously, each out-doing the other. ‘What misfortune has happened
then?’ asked he. ‘Ah, dear Hans,’ said Elsie, ‘if we marry each other
and have a child, and he is big, and we perhaps send him here to draw
something to drink, then the pick-axe which has been left up there might
dash his brains out if it were to fall down, so have we not reason to
weep?’ ‘Come,’ said Hans, ‘more understanding than that is not needed
for my household, as you are such a clever Elsie, I will have you,’ and
seized her hand, took her upstairs with him, and married her.

After Hans had had her some time, he said: ‘Wife, I am going out to work
and earn some money for us; go into the field and cut the corn that we
may have some bread.’ ‘Yes, dear Hans, I will do that.’ After Hans had
gone away, she cooked herself some good broth and took it into the field
with her. When she came to the field she said to herself: ‘What shall I
do; shall I cut first, or shall I eat first? Oh, I will eat first.’ Then
she drank her cup of broth and when she was fully satisfied, she once
more said: ‘What shall I do? Shall I cut first, or shall I sleep first?
I will sleep first.’ Then she lay down among the corn and fell asleep.
Hans had been at home for a long time, but Elsie did not come; then said
he: ‘What a clever Elsie I have; she is so industrious that she does not
even come home to eat.’ But when evening came and she still stayed away,
Hans went out to see what she had cut, but nothing was cut, and she
was lying among the corn asleep. Then Hans hastened home and brought
a fowler’s net with little bells and hung it round about her, and she
still went on sleeping. Then he ran home, shut the house-door, and sat
down in his chair and worked. At length, when it was quite dark, Clever
Elsie awoke and when she got up there was a jingling all round about
her, and the bells rang at each step which she took. Then she was
alarmed, and became uncertain whether she really was Clever Elsie or
not, and said: ‘Is it I, or is it not I?’ But she knew not what answer
to make to this, and stood for a time in doubt; at length she thought:
‘I will go home and ask if it be I, or if it be not I, they will be sure
to know.’ She ran to the door of her own house, but it was shut; then
she knocked at the window and cried: ‘Hans, is Elsie within?’ ‘Yes,’
answered Hans, ‘she is within.’ Hereupon she was terrified, and said:
‘Ah, heavens! Then it is not I,’ and went to another door; but when the
people heard the jingling of the bells they would not open it, and she
could get in nowhere. Then she ran out of the village, and no one has
seen her since.




THE MISER IN THE BUSH

A farmer had a faithful and diligent servant, who had worked hard for
him three years, without having been paid any wages. At last it came
into the man’s head that he would not go on thus without pay any longer;
so he went to his master, and said, ‘I have worked hard for you a long
time, I will trust to you to give me what I deserve to have for my
trouble.’ The farmer was a sad miser, and knew that his man was very
simple-hearted; so he took out threepence, and gave him for every year’s
service a penny. The poor fellow thought it was a great deal of money to
have, and said to himself, ‘Why should I work hard, and live here on bad
fare any longer? I can now travel into the wide world, and make myself
merry.’ With that he put his money into his purse, and set out, roaming
over hill and valley.

As he jogged along over the fields, singing and dancing, a little dwarf
met him, and asked him what made him so merry. ‘Why, what should make
me down-hearted?’ said he; ‘I am sound in health and rich in purse, what
should I care for? I have saved up my three years’ earnings and have it
all safe in my pocket.’ ‘How much may it come to?’ said the little man.
‘Full threepence,’ replied the countryman. ‘I wish you would give them
to me,’ said the other; ‘I am very poor.’ Then the man pitied him, and
gave him all he had; and the little dwarf said in return, ‘As you have
such a kind honest heart, I will grant you three wishes--one for every
penny; so choose whatever you like.’ Then the countryman rejoiced at
his good luck, and said, ‘I like many things better than money: first, I
will have a bow that will bring down everything I shoot at; secondly,
a fiddle that will set everyone dancing that hears me play upon it; and
thirdly, I should like that everyone should grant what I ask.’ The dwarf
said he should have his three wishes; so he gave him the bow and fiddle,
and went his way.

Our honest friend journeyed on his way too; and if he was merry before,
he was now ten times more so. He had not gone far before he met an old
miser: close by them stood a tree, and on the topmost twig sat a thrush
singing away most joyfully. ‘Oh, what a pretty bird!’ said the miser; ‘I
would give a great deal of money to have such a one.’ ‘If that’s all,’
said the countryman, ‘I will soon bring it down.’ Then he took up his
bow, and down fell the thrush into the bushes at the foot of the tree.
The miser crept into the bush to find it; but directly he had got into
the middle, his companion took up his fiddle and played away, and the
miser began to dance and spring about, capering higher and higher in
the air. The thorns soon began to tear his clothes till they all hung
in rags about him, and he himself was all scratched and wounded, so that
the blood ran down. ‘Oh, for heaven’s sake!’ cried the miser, ‘Master!
master! pray let the fiddle alone. What have I done to deserve this?’
‘Thou hast shaved many a poor soul close enough,’ said the other; ‘thou
art only meeting thy reward’: so he played up another tune. Then the
miser began to beg and promise, and offered money for his liberty; but
he did not come up to the musician’s price for some time, and he danced
him along brisker and brisker, and the miser bid higher and higher, till
at last he offered a round hundred of florins that he had in his purse,
and had just gained by cheating some poor fellow. When the countryman
saw so much money, he said, ‘I will agree to your proposal.’ So he took
the purse, put up his fiddle, and travelled on very pleased with his
bargain.

Meanwhile the miser crept out of the bush half-naked and in a piteous
plight, and began to ponder how he should take his revenge, and serve
his late companion some trick. At last he went to the judge, and
complained that a rascal had robbed him of his money, and beaten him
into the bargain; and that the fellow who did it carried a bow at his
back and a fiddle hung round his neck. Then the judge sent out his
officers to bring up the accused wherever they should find him; and he
was soon caught and brought up to be tried.

The miser began to tell his tale, and said he had been robbed of
his money. ‘No, you gave it me for playing a tune to you.’ said the
countryman; but the judge told him that was not likely, and cut the
matter short by ordering him off to the gallows.

So away he was taken; but as he stood on the steps he said, ‘My Lord
Judge, grant me one last request.’ ‘Anything but thy life,’ replied the
other. ‘No,’ said he, ‘I do not ask my life; only to let me play upon
my fiddle for the last time.’ The miser cried out, ‘Oh, no! no! for
heaven’s sake don’t listen to him! don’t listen to him!’ But the judge
said, ‘It is only this once, he will soon have done.’ The fact was, he
could not refuse the request, on account of the dwarf’s third gift.

Then the miser said, ‘Bind me fast, bind me fast, for pity’s sake.’ But
the countryman seized his fiddle, and struck up a tune, and at the first
note judge, clerks, and jailer were in motion; all began capering, and
no one could hold the miser. At the second note the hangman let his
prisoner go, and danced also, and by the time he had played the first
bar of the tune, all were dancing together--judge, court, and miser, and
all the people who had followed to look on. At first the thing was merry
and pleasant enough; but when it had gone on a while, and there seemed
to be no end of playing or dancing, they began to cry out, and beg him
to leave off; but he stopped not a whit the more for their entreaties,
till the judge not only gave him his life, but promised to return him
the hundred florins.

Then he called to the miser, and said, ‘Tell us now, you vagabond, where
you got that gold, or I shall play on for your amusement only,’ ‘I stole
it,’ said the miser in the presence of all the people; ‘I acknowledge
that I stole it, and that you earned it fairly.’ Then the countryman
stopped his fiddle, and left the miser to take his place at the gallows.




ASHPUTTEL

The wife of a rich man fell sick; and when she felt that her end drew
nigh, she called her only daughter to her bed-side, and said, ‘Always be
a good girl, and I will look down from heaven and watch over you.’ Soon
afterwards she shut her eyes and died, and was buried in the garden;
and the little girl went every day to her grave and wept, and was always
good and kind to all about her. And the snow fell and spread a beautiful
white covering over the grave; but by the time the spring came, and the
sun had melted it away again, her father had married another wife. This
new wife had two daughters of her own, that she brought home with her;
they were fair in face but foul at heart, and it was now a sorry time
for the poor little girl. ‘What does the good-for-nothing want in the
parlour?’ said they; ‘they who would eat bread should first earn it;
away with the kitchen-maid!’ Then they took away her fine clothes, and
gave her an old grey frock to put on, and laughed at her, and turned her
into the kitchen.

There she was forced to do hard work; to rise early before daylight, to
bring the water, to make the fire, to cook and to wash. Besides that,
the sisters plagued her in all sorts of ways, and laughed at her. In the
evening when she was tired, she had no bed to lie down on, but was made
to lie by the hearth among the ashes; and as this, of course, made her
always dusty and dirty, they called her Ashputtel.

It happened once that the father was going to the fair, and asked his
wife’s daughters what he should bring them. ‘Fine clothes,’ said the
first; ‘Pearls and diamonds,’ cried the second. ‘Now, child,’ said he
to his own daughter, ‘what will you have?’ ‘The first twig, dear
father, that brushes against your hat when you turn your face to come
homewards,’ said she. Then he bought for the first two the fine clothes
and pearls and diamonds they had asked for: and on his way home, as he
rode through a green copse, a hazel twig brushed against him, and almost
pushed off his hat: so he broke it off and brought it away; and when he
got home he gave it to his daughter. Then she took it, and went to
her mother’s grave and planted it there; and cried so much that it was
watered with her tears; and there it grew and became a fine tree. Three
times every day she went to it and cried; and soon a little bird came
and built its nest upon the tree, and talked with her, and watched over
her, and brought her whatever she wished for.

Now it happened that the king of that land held a feast, which was to
last three days; and out of those who came to it his son was to choose
a bride for himself. Ashputtel’s two sisters were asked to come; so they
called her up, and said, ‘Now, comb our hair, brush our shoes, and tie
our sashes for us, for we are going to dance at the king’s feast.’
Then she did as she was told; but when all was done she could not help
crying, for she thought to herself, she should so have liked to have
gone with them to the ball; and at last she begged her mother very hard
to let her go. ‘You, Ashputtel!’ said she; ‘you who have nothing to
wear, no clothes at all, and who cannot even dance--you want to go to
the ball? And when she kept on begging, she said at last, to get rid of
her, ‘I will throw this dishful of peas into the ash-heap, and if in
two hours’ time you have picked them all out, you shall go to the feast
too.’

Then she threw the peas down among the ashes, but the little maiden ran
out at the back door into the garden, and cried out:

 ‘Hither, hither, through the sky,
  Turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
  Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hither, hither, haste away!
  One and all come help me, quick!
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’

Then first came two white doves, flying in at the kitchen window; next
came two turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under
heaven, chirping and fluttering in: and they flew down into the ashes.
And the little doves stooped their heads down and set to work, pick,
pick, pick; and then the others began to pick, pick, pick: and among
them all they soon picked out all the good grain, and put it into a dish
but left the ashes. Long before the end of the hour the work was quite
done, and all flew out again at the windows.

Then Ashputtel brought the dish to her mother, overjoyed at the thought
that now she should go to the ball. But the mother said, ‘No, no! you
slut, you have no clothes, and cannot dance; you shall not go.’ And when
Ashputtel begged very hard to go, she said, ‘If you can in one hour’s
time pick two of those dishes of peas out of the ashes, you shall go
too.’ And thus she thought she should at least get rid of her. So she
shook two dishes of peas into the ashes.

But the little maiden went out into the garden at the back of the house,
and cried out as before:

 ‘Hither, hither, through the sky,
  Turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
  Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hither, hither, haste away!
  One and all come help me, quick!
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’

Then first came two white doves in at the kitchen window; next came two
turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under heaven,
chirping and hopping about. And they flew down into the ashes; and the
little doves put their heads down and set to work, pick, pick, pick; and
then the others began pick, pick, pick; and they put all the good grain
into the dishes, and left all the ashes. Before half an hour’s time all
was done, and out they flew again. And then Ashputtel took the dishes to
her mother, rejoicing to think that she should now go to the ball.
But her mother said, ‘It is all of no use, you cannot go; you have no
clothes, and cannot dance, and you would only put us to shame’: and off
she went with her two daughters to the ball.

Now when all were gone, and nobody left at home, Ashputtel went
sorrowfully and sat down under the hazel-tree, and cried out:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

Then her friend the bird flew out of the tree, and brought a gold and
silver dress for her, and slippers of spangled silk; and she put them
on, and followed her sisters to the feast. But they did not know her,
and thought it must be some strange princess, she looked so fine and
beautiful in her rich clothes; and they never once thought of Ashputtel,
taking it for granted that she was safe at home in the dirt.

The king’s son soon came up to her, and took her by the hand and danced
with her, and no one else: and he never left her hand; but when anyone
else came to ask her to dance, he said, ‘This lady is dancing with me.’

Thus they danced till a late hour of the night; and then she wanted to
go home: and the king’s son said, ‘I shall go and take care of you to
your home’; for he wanted to see where the beautiful maiden lived. But
she slipped away from him, unawares, and ran off towards home; and as
the prince followed her, she jumped up into the pigeon-house and shut
the door. Then he waited till her father came home, and told him that
the unknown maiden, who had been at the feast, had hid herself in the
pigeon-house. But when they had broken open the door they found no one
within; and as they came back into the house, Ashputtel was lying, as
she always did, in her dirty frock by the ashes, and her dim little
lamp was burning in the chimney. For she had run as quickly as she could
through the pigeon-house and on to the hazel-tree, and had there taken
off her beautiful clothes, and put them beneath the tree, that the bird
might carry them away, and had lain down again amid the ashes in her
little grey frock.

The next day when the feast was again held, and her father, mother, and
sisters were gone, Ashputtel went to the hazel-tree, and said:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

And the bird came and brought a still finer dress than the one she
had worn the day before. And when she came in it to the ball, everyone
wondered at her beauty: but the king’s son, who was waiting for her,
took her by the hand, and danced with her; and when anyone asked her to
dance, he said as before, ‘This lady is dancing with me.’

When night came she wanted to go home; and the king’s son followed here
as before, that he might see into what house she went: but she sprang
away from him all at once into the garden behind her father’s house.
In this garden stood a fine large pear-tree full of ripe fruit; and
Ashputtel, not knowing where to hide herself, jumped up into it without
being seen. Then the king’s son lost sight of her, and could not find
out where she was gone, but waited till her father came home, and said
to him, ‘The unknown lady who danced with me has slipped away, and I
think she must have sprung into the pear-tree.’ The father thought to
himself, ‘Can it be Ashputtel?’ So he had an axe brought; and they cut
down the tree, but found no one upon it. And when they came back into
the kitchen, there lay Ashputtel among the ashes; for she had slipped
down on the other side of the tree, and carried her beautiful clothes
back to the bird at the hazel-tree, and then put on her little grey
frock.

The third day, when her father and mother and sisters were gone, she
went again into the garden, and said:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

Then her kind friend the bird brought a dress still finer than the
former one, and slippers which were all of gold: so that when she came
to the feast no one knew what to say, for wonder at her beauty: and the
king’s son danced with nobody but her; and when anyone else asked her to
dance, he said, ‘This lady is _my_ partner, sir.’

When night came she wanted to go home; and the king’s son would go with
her, and said to himself, ‘I will not lose her this time’; but, however,
she again slipped away from him, though in such a hurry that she dropped
her left golden slipper upon the stairs.

The prince took the shoe, and went the next day to the king his father,
and said, ‘I will take for my wife the lady that this golden slipper
fits.’ Then both the sisters were overjoyed to hear it; for they
had beautiful feet, and had no doubt that they could wear the golden
slipper. The eldest went first into the room where the slipper was, and
wanted to try it on, and the mother stood by. But her great toe could
not go into it, and the shoe was altogether much too small for her. Then
the mother gave her a knife, and said, ‘Never mind, cut it off; when you
are queen you will not care about toes; you will not want to walk.’ So
the silly girl cut off her great toe, and thus squeezed on the shoe,
and went to the king’s son. Then he took her for his bride, and set her
beside him on his horse, and rode away with her homewards.

But on their way home they had to pass by the hazel-tree that Ashputtel
had planted; and on the branch sat a little dove singing:

 ‘Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
  The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
  Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
  For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’

Then the prince got down and looked at her foot; and he saw, by the
blood that streamed from it, what a trick she had played him. So he
turned his horse round, and brought the false bride back to her home,
and said, ‘This is not the right bride; let the other sister try and put
on the slipper.’ Then she went into the room and got her foot into the
shoe, all but the heel, which was too large. But her mother squeezed it
in till the blood came, and took her to the king’s son: and he set her
as his bride by his side on his horse, and rode away with her.

But when they came to the hazel-tree the little dove sat there still,
and sang:

 ‘Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
  The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
  Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
  For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’

Then he looked down, and saw that the blood streamed so much from the
shoe, that her white stockings were quite red. So he turned his horse
and brought her also back again. ‘This is not the true bride,’ said he
to the father; ‘have you no other daughters?’ ‘No,’ said he; ‘there is
only a little dirty Ashputtel here, the child of my first wife; I am
sure she cannot be the bride.’ The prince told him to send her. But the
mother said, ‘No, no, she is much too dirty; she will not dare to show
herself.’ However, the prince would have her come; and she first washed
her face and hands, and then went in and curtsied to him, and he reached
her the golden slipper. Then she took her clumsy shoe off her left foot,
and put on the golden slipper; and it fitted her as if it had been made
for her. And when he drew near and looked at her face he knew her, and
said, ‘This is the right bride.’ But the mother and both the sisters
were frightened, and turned pale with anger as he took Ashputtel on his
horse, and rode away with her. And when they came to the hazel-tree, the
white dove sang:

 ‘Home! home! look at the shoe!
  Princess! the shoe was made for you!
  Prince! prince! take home thy bride,
  For she is the true one that sits by thy side!’

And when the dove had done its song, it came flying, and perched upon
her right shoulder, and so went home with her.




THE WHITE SNAKE

A long time ago there lived a king who was famed for his wisdom through
all the land. Nothing was hidden from him, and it seemed as if news of
the most secret things was brought to him through the air. But he had a
strange custom; every day after dinner, when the table was cleared,
and no one else was present, a trusty servant had to bring him one more
dish. It was covered, however, and even the servant did not know what
was in it, neither did anyone know, for the king never took off the
cover to eat of it until he was quite alone.

This had gone on for a long time, when one day the servant, who took
away the dish, was overcome with such curiosity that he could not help
carrying the dish into his room. When he had carefully locked the door,
he lifted up the cover, and saw a white snake lying on the dish. But
when he saw it he could not deny himself the pleasure of tasting it,
so he cut of a little bit and put it into his mouth. No sooner had it
touched his tongue than he heard a strange whispering of little voices
outside his window. He went and listened, and then noticed that it was
the sparrows who were chattering together, and telling one another of
all kinds of things which they had seen in the fields and woods. Eating
the snake had given him power of understanding the language of animals.

Now it so happened that on this very day the queen lost her most
beautiful ring, and suspicion of having stolen it fell upon this trusty
servant, who was allowed to go everywhere. The king ordered the man to
be brought before him, and threatened with angry words that unless he
could before the morrow point out the thief, he himself should be looked
upon as guilty and executed. In vain he declared his innocence; he was
dismissed with no better answer.

In his trouble and fear he went down into the courtyard and took thought
how to help himself out of his trouble. Now some ducks were sitting
together quietly by a brook and taking their rest; and, whilst they
were making their feathers smooth with their bills, they were having a
confidential conversation together. The servant stood by and listened.
They were telling one another of all the places where they had been
waddling about all the morning, and what good food they had found; and
one said in a pitiful tone: ‘Something lies heavy on my stomach; as
I was eating in haste I swallowed a ring which lay under the queen’s
window.’ The servant at once seized her by the neck, carried her to the
kitchen, and said to the cook: ‘Here is a fine duck; pray, kill her.’
‘Yes,’ said the cook, and weighed her in his hand; ‘she has spared
no trouble to fatten herself, and has been waiting to be roasted long
enough.’ So he cut off her head, and as she was being dressed for the
spit, the queen’s ring was found inside her.

The servant could now easily prove his innocence; and the king, to make
amends for the wrong, allowed him to ask a favour, and promised him
the best place in the court that he could wish for. The servant refused
everything, and only asked for a horse and some money for travelling, as
he had a mind to see the world and go about a little. When his request
was granted he set out on his way, and one day came to a pond, where he
saw three fishes caught in the reeds and gasping for water. Now, though
it is said that fishes are dumb, he heard them lamenting that they must
perish so miserably, and, as he had a kind heart, he got off his
horse and put the three prisoners back into the water. They leapt with
delight, put out their heads, and cried to him: ‘We will remember you
and repay you for saving us!’

He rode on, and after a while it seemed to him that he heard a voice in
the sand at his feet. He listened, and heard an ant-king complain: ‘Why
cannot folks, with their clumsy beasts, keep off our bodies? That stupid
horse, with his heavy hoofs, has been treading down my people without
mercy!’ So he turned on to a side path and the ant-king cried out to
him: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves another!’

The path led him into a wood, and there he saw two old ravens standing
by their nest, and throwing out their young ones. ‘Out with you, you
idle, good-for-nothing creatures!’ cried they; ‘we cannot find food for
you any longer; you are big enough, and can provide for yourselves.’
But the poor young ravens lay upon the ground, flapping their wings, and
crying: ‘Oh, what helpless chicks we are! We must shift for ourselves,
and yet we cannot fly! What can we do, but lie here and starve?’ So the
good young fellow alighted and killed his horse with his sword, and gave
it to them for food. Then they came hopping up to it, satisfied their
hunger, and cried: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves
another!’

And now he had to use his own legs, and when he had walked a long
way, he came to a large city. There was a great noise and crowd in
the streets, and a man rode up on horseback, crying aloud: ‘The king’s
daughter wants a husband; but whoever seeks her hand must perform a hard
task, and if he does not succeed he will forfeit his life.’ Many had
already made the attempt, but in vain; nevertheless when the youth
saw the king’s daughter he was so overcome by her great beauty that he
forgot all danger, went before the king, and declared himself a suitor.

So he was led out to the sea, and a gold ring was thrown into it, before
his eyes; then the king ordered him to fetch this ring up from the
bottom of the sea, and added: ‘If you come up again without it you will
be thrown in again and again until you perish amid the waves.’ All the
people grieved for the handsome youth; then they went away, leaving him
alone by the sea.

He stood on the shore and considered what he should do, when suddenly
he saw three fishes come swimming towards him, and they were the very
fishes whose lives he had saved. The one in the middle held a mussel in
its mouth, which it laid on the shore at the youth’s feet, and when he
had taken it up and opened it, there lay the gold ring in the shell.
Full of joy he took it to the king and expected that he would grant him
the promised reward.

But when the proud princess perceived that he was not her equal in
birth, she scorned him, and required him first to perform another
task. She went down into the garden and strewed with her own hands ten
sacksful of millet-seed on the grass; then she said: ‘Tomorrow morning
before sunrise these must be picked up, and not a single grain be
wanting.’

The youth sat down in the garden and considered how it might be possible
to perform this task, but he could think of nothing, and there he sat
sorrowfully awaiting the break of day, when he should be led to death.
But as soon as the first rays of the sun shone into the garden he saw
all the ten sacks standing side by side, quite full, and not a single
grain was missing. The ant-king had come in the night with thousands
and thousands of ants, and the grateful creatures had by great industry
picked up all the millet-seed and gathered them into the sacks.

Presently the king’s daughter herself came down into the garden, and was
amazed to see that the young man had done the task she had given him.
But she could not yet conquer her proud heart, and said: ‘Although he
has performed both the tasks, he shall not be my husband until he had
brought me an apple from the Tree of Life.’ The youth did not know where
the Tree of Life stood, but he set out, and would have gone on for ever,
as long as his legs would carry him, though he had no hope of finding
it. After he had wandered through three kingdoms, he came one evening to
a wood, and lay down under a tree to sleep. But he heard a rustling in
the branches, and a golden apple fell into his hand. At the same time
three ravens flew down to him, perched themselves upon his knee, and
said: ‘We are the three young ravens whom you saved from starving; when
we had grown big, and heard that you were seeking the Golden Apple,
we flew over the sea to the end of the world, where the Tree of Life
stands, and have brought you the apple.’ The youth, full of joy, set out
homewards, and took the Golden Apple to the king’s beautiful daughter,
who had now no more excuses left to make. They cut the Apple of Life in
two and ate it together; and then her heart became full of love for him,
and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age.




THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN LITTLE KIDS

There was once upon a time an old goat who had seven little kids, and
loved them with all the love of a mother for her children. One day she
wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food. So she called all
seven to her and said: ‘Dear children, I have to go into the forest,
be on your guard against the wolf; if he comes in, he will devour you
all--skin, hair, and everything. The wretch often disguises himself, but
you will know him at once by his rough voice and his black feet.’ The
kids said: ‘Dear mother, we will take good care of ourselves; you may go
away without any anxiety.’ Then the old one bleated, and went on her way
with an easy mind.

It was not long before someone knocked at the house-door and called:
‘Open the door, dear children; your mother is here, and has brought
something back with her for each of you.’ But the little kids knew that
it was the wolf, by the rough voice. ‘We will not open the door,’ cried
they, ‘you are not our mother. She has a soft, pleasant voice, but
your voice is rough; you are the wolf!’ Then the wolf went away to a
shopkeeper and bought himself a great lump of chalk, ate this and made
his voice soft with it. Then he came back, knocked at the door of the
house, and called: ‘Open the door, dear children, your mother is here
and has brought something back with her for each of you.’ But the wolf
had laid his black paws against the window, and the children saw them
and cried: ‘We will not open the door, our mother has not black feet
like you: you are the wolf!’ Then the wolf ran to a baker and said: ‘I
have hurt my feet, rub some dough over them for me.’ And when the baker
had rubbed his feet over, he ran to the miller and said: ‘Strew some
white meal over my feet for me.’ The miller thought to himself: ‘The
wolf wants to deceive someone,’ and refused; but the wolf said: ‘If you
will not do it, I will devour you.’ Then the miller was afraid, and made
his paws white for him. Truly, this is the way of mankind.

So now the wretch went for the third time to the house-door, knocked at
it and said: ‘Open the door for me, children, your dear little mother
has come home, and has brought every one of you something back from the
forest with her.’ The little kids cried: ‘First show us your paws that
we may know if you are our dear little mother.’ Then he put his paws
in through the window and when the kids saw that they were white, they
believed that all he said was true, and opened the door. But who should
come in but the wolf! They were terrified and wanted to hide themselves.
One sprang under the table, the second into the bed, the third into the
stove, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, the
sixth under the washing-bowl, and the seventh into the clock-case. But
the wolf found them all, and used no great ceremony; one after the
other he swallowed them down his throat. The youngest, who was in
the clock-case, was the only one he did not find. When the wolf had
satisfied his appetite he took himself off, laid himself down under a
tree in the green meadow outside, and began to sleep. Soon afterwards
the old goat came home again from the forest. Ah! what a sight she saw
there! The house-door stood wide open. The table, chairs, and benches
were thrown down, the washing-bowl lay broken to pieces, and the quilts
and pillows were pulled off the bed. She sought her children, but they
were nowhere to be found. She called them one after another by name, but
no one answered. At last, when she came to the youngest, a soft voice
cried: ‘Dear mother, I am in the clock-case.’ She took the kid out, and
it told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the others. Then
you may imagine how she wept over her poor children.

At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest kid ran with her.
When they came to the meadow, there lay the wolf by the tree and snored
so loud that the branches shook. She looked at him on every side and
saw that something was moving and struggling in his gorged belly. ‘Ah,
heavens,’ she said, ‘is it possible that my poor children whom he has
swallowed down for his supper, can be still alive?’ Then the kid had to
run home and fetch scissors, and a needle and thread, and the goat cut
open the monster’s stomach, and hardly had she made one cut, than one
little kid thrust its head out, and when she had cut farther, all six
sprang out one after another, and were all still alive, and had suffered
no injury whatever, for in his greediness the monster had swallowed them
down whole. What rejoicing there was! They embraced their dear mother,
and jumped like a tailor at his wedding. The mother, however, said: ‘Now
go and look for some big stones, and we will fill the wicked beast’s
stomach with them while he is still asleep.’ Then the seven kids dragged
the stones thither with all speed, and put as many of them into this
stomach as they could get in; and the mother sewed him up again in the
greatest haste, so that he was not aware of anything and never once
stirred.

When the wolf at length had had his fill of sleep, he got on his legs,
and as the stones in his stomach made him very thirsty, he wanted to
go to a well to drink. But when he began to walk and to move about, the
stones in his stomach knocked against each other and rattled. Then cried
he:

 ‘What rumbles and tumbles
  Against my poor bones?
  I thought ‘twas six kids,
  But it feels like big stones.’

And when he got to the well and stooped over the water to drink, the
heavy stones made him fall in, and he drowned miserably. When the seven
kids saw that, they came running to the spot and cried aloud: ‘The wolf
is dead! The wolf is dead!’ and danced for joy round about the well with
their mother.




THE QUEEN BEE

Two kings’ sons once upon a time went into the world to seek their
fortunes; but they soon fell into a wasteful foolish way of living, so
that they could not return home again. Then their brother, who was a
little insignificant dwarf, went out to seek for his brothers: but when
he had found them they only laughed at him, to think that he, who was so
young and simple, should try to travel through the world, when they, who
were so much wiser, had been unable to get on. However, they all set
out on their journey together, and came at last to an ant-hill. The two
elder brothers would have pulled it down, in order to see how the poor
ants in their fright would run about and carry off their eggs. But the
little dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, I will not
suffer you to trouble them.’

So on they went, and came to a lake where many many ducks were swimming
about. The two brothers wanted to catch two, and roast them. But the
dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, you shall not kill
them.’ Next they came to a bees’-nest in a hollow tree, and there was
so much honey that it ran down the trunk; and the two brothers wanted to
light a fire under the tree and kill the bees, so as to get their honey.
But the dwarf held them back, and said, ‘Let the pretty insects enjoy
themselves, I cannot let you burn them.’

At length the three brothers came to a castle: and as they passed by the
stables they saw fine horses standing there, but all were of marble, and
no man was to be seen. Then they went through all the rooms, till they
came to a door on which were three locks: but in the middle of the door
was a wicket, so that they could look into the next room. There they saw
a little grey old man sitting at a table; and they called to him once or
twice, but he did not hear: however, they called a third time, and then
he rose and came out to them.

He said nothing, but took hold of them and led them to a beautiful
table covered with all sorts of good things: and when they had eaten and
drunk, he showed each of them to a bed-chamber.

The next morning he came to the eldest and took him to a marble table,
where there were three tablets, containing an account of the means by
which the castle might be disenchanted. The first tablet said: ‘In the
wood, under the moss, lie the thousand pearls belonging to the king’s
daughter; they must all be found: and if one be missing by set of sun,
he who seeks them will be turned into marble.’

The eldest brother set out, and sought for the pearls the whole day:
but the evening came, and he had not found the first hundred: so he was
turned into stone as the tablet had foretold.

The next day the second brother undertook the task; but he succeeded no
better than the first; for he could only find the second hundred of the
pearls; and therefore he too was turned into stone.

At last came the little dwarf’s turn; and he looked in the moss; but it
was so hard to find the pearls, and the job was so tiresome!--so he sat
down upon a stone and cried. And as he sat there, the king of the ants
(whose life he had saved) came to help him, with five thousand ants; and
it was not long before they had found all the pearls and laid them in a
heap.

The second tablet said: ‘The key of the princess’s bed-chamber must be
fished up out of the lake.’ And as the dwarf came to the brink of it,
he saw the two ducks whose lives he had saved swimming about; and they
dived down and soon brought in the key from the bottom.

The third task was the hardest. It was to choose out the youngest and
the best of the king’s three daughters. Now they were all beautiful, and
all exactly alike: but he was told that the eldest had eaten a piece of
sugar, the next some sweet syrup, and the youngest a spoonful of honey;
so he was to guess which it was that had eaten the honey.

Then came the queen of the bees, who had been saved by the little dwarf
from the fire, and she tried the lips of all three; but at last she sat
upon the lips of the one that had eaten the honey: and so the dwarf knew
which was the youngest. Thus the spell was broken, and all who had been
turned into stones awoke, and took their proper forms. And the dwarf
married the youngest and the best of the princesses, and was king after
her father’s death; but his two brothers married the other two sisters.




THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER

There was once a shoemaker, who worked very hard and was very honest:
but still he could not earn enough to live upon; and at last all he
had in the world was gone, save just leather enough to make one pair of
shoes.

Then he cut his leather out, all ready to make up the next day, meaning
to rise early in the morning to his work. His conscience was clear and
his heart light amidst all his troubles; so he went peaceably to bed,
left all his cares to Heaven, and soon fell asleep. In the morning after
he had said his prayers, he sat himself down to his work; when, to his
great wonder, there stood the shoes all ready made, upon the table. The
good man knew not what to say or think at such an odd thing happening.
He looked at the workmanship; there was not one false stitch in the
whole job; all was so neat and true, that it was quite a masterpiece.

The same day a customer came in, and the shoes suited him so well that
he willingly paid a price higher than usual for them; and the poor
shoemaker, with the money, bought leather enough to make two pairs more.
In the evening he cut out the work, and went to bed early, that he might
get up and begin betimes next day; but he was saved all the trouble, for
when he got up in the morning the work was done ready to his hand. Soon
in came buyers, who paid him handsomely for his goods, so that he bought
leather enough for four pair more. He cut out the work again overnight
and found it done in the morning, as before; and so it went on for some
time: what was got ready in the evening was always done by daybreak, and
the good man soon became thriving and well off again.

One evening, about Christmas-time, as he and his wife were sitting over
the fire chatting together, he said to her, ‘I should like to sit up and
watch tonight, that we may see who it is that comes and does my work for
me.’ The wife liked the thought; so they left a light burning, and hid
themselves in a corner of the room, behind a curtain that was hung up
there, and watched what would happen.

As soon as it was midnight, there came in two little naked dwarfs; and
they sat themselves upon the shoemaker’s bench, took up all the work
that was cut out, and began to ply with their little fingers, stitching
and rapping and tapping away at such a rate, that the shoemaker was all
wonder, and could not take his eyes off them. And on they went, till the
job was quite done, and the shoes stood ready for use upon the table.
This was long before daybreak; and then they bustled away as quick as
lightning.

The next day the wife said to the shoemaker. ‘These little wights have
made us rich, and we ought to be thankful to them, and do them a good
turn if we can. I am quite sorry to see them run about as they do; and
indeed it is not very decent, for they have nothing upon their backs to
keep off the cold. I’ll tell you what, I will make each of them a shirt,
and a coat and waistcoat, and a pair of pantaloons into the bargain; and
do you make each of them a little pair of shoes.’

The thought pleased the good cobbler very much; and one evening, when
all the things were ready, they laid them on the table, instead of the
work that they used to cut out, and then went and hid themselves, to
watch what the little elves would do.

About midnight in they came, dancing and skipping, hopped round the
room, and then went to sit down to their work as usual; but when they
saw the clothes lying for them, they laughed and chuckled, and seemed
mightily delighted.

Then they dressed themselves in the twinkling of an eye, and danced and
capered and sprang about, as merry as could be; till at last they danced
out at the door, and away over the green.

The good couple saw them no more; but everything went well with them
from that time forward, as long as they lived.




THE JUNIPER-TREE

Long, long ago, some two thousand years or so, there lived a rich
man with a good and beautiful wife. They loved each other dearly, but
sorrowed much that they had no children. So greatly did they desire
to have one, that the wife prayed for it day and night, but still they
remained childless.

In front of the house there was a court, in which grew a juniper-tree.
One winter’s day the wife stood under the tree to peel some apples, and
as she was peeling them, she cut her finger, and the blood fell on the
snow. ‘Ah,’ sighed the woman heavily, ‘if I had but a child, as red as
blood and as white as snow,’ and as she spoke the words, her heart grew
light within her, and it seemed to her that her wish was granted, and
she returned to the house feeling glad and comforted. A month passed,
and the snow had all disappeared; then another month went by, and all
the earth was green. So the months followed one another, and first the
trees budded in the woods, and soon the green branches grew thickly
intertwined, and then the blossoms began to fall. Once again the wife
stood under the juniper-tree, and it was so full of sweet scent that her
heart leaped for joy, and she was so overcome with her happiness, that
she fell on her knees. Presently the fruit became round and firm, and
she was glad and at peace; but when they were fully ripe she picked the
berries and ate eagerly of them, and then she grew sad and ill. A little
while later she called her husband, and said to him, weeping. ‘If I
die, bury me under the juniper-tree.’ Then she felt comforted and happy
again, and before another month had passed she had a little child, and
when she saw that it was as white as snow and as red as blood, her joy
was so great that she died.

Her husband buried her under the juniper-tree, and wept bitterly for
her. By degrees, however, his sorrow grew less, and although at times he
still grieved over his loss, he was able to go about as usual, and later
on he married again.

He now had a little daughter born to him; the child of his first wife
was a boy, who was as red as blood and as white as snow. The mother
loved her daughter very much, and when she looked at her and then looked
at the boy, it pierced her heart to think that he would always stand in
the way of her own child, and she was continually thinking how she could
get the whole of the property for her. This evil thought took possession
of her more and more, and made her behave very unkindly to the boy. She
drove him from place to place with cuffings and buffetings, so that the
poor child went about in fear, and had no peace from the time he left
school to the time he went back.

One day the little daughter came running to her mother in the
store-room, and said, ‘Mother, give me an apple.’ ‘Yes, my child,’ said
the wife, and she gave her a beautiful apple out of the chest; the chest
had a very heavy lid and a large iron lock.

‘Mother,’ said the little daughter again, ‘may not brother have one
too?’ The mother was angry at this, but she answered, ‘Yes, when he
comes out of school.’

Just then she looked out of the window and saw him coming, and it seemed
as if an evil spirit entered into her, for she snatched the apple out
of her little daughter’s hand, and said, ‘You shall not have one before
your brother.’ She threw the apple into the chest and shut it to. The
little boy now came in, and the evil spirit in the wife made her say
kindly to him, ‘My son, will you have an apple?’ but she gave him a
wicked look. ‘Mother,’ said the boy, ‘how dreadful you look! Yes, give
me an apple.’ The thought came to her that she would kill him. ‘Come
with me,’ she said, and she lifted up the lid of the chest; ‘take one
out for yourself.’ And as he bent over to do so, the evil spirit urged
her, and crash! down went the lid, and off went the little boy’s head.
Then she was overwhelmed with fear at the thought of what she had done.
‘If only I can prevent anyone knowing that I did it,’ she thought. So
she went upstairs to her room, and took a white handkerchief out of
her top drawer; then she set the boy’s head again on his shoulders, and
bound it with the handkerchief so that nothing could be seen, and placed
him on a chair by the door with an apple in his hand.

Soon after this, little Marleen came up to her mother who was stirring
a pot of boiling water over the fire, and said, ‘Mother, brother is
sitting by the door with an apple in his hand, and he looks so pale;
and when I asked him to give me the apple, he did not answer, and that
frightened me.’

‘Go to him again,’ said her mother, ‘and if he does not answer, give him
a box on the ear.’ So little Marleen went, and said, ‘Brother, give me
that apple,’ but he did not say a word; then she gave him a box on the
ear, and his head rolled off. She was so terrified at this, that she ran
crying and screaming to her mother. ‘Oh!’ she said, ‘I have knocked off
brother’s head,’ and then she wept and wept, and nothing would stop her.

‘What have you done!’ said her mother, ‘but no one must know about it,
so you must keep silence; what is done can’t be undone; we will make
him into puddings.’ And she took the little boy and cut him up, made him
into puddings, and put him in the pot. But Marleen stood looking on,
and wept and wept, and her tears fell into the pot, so that there was no
need of salt.

Presently the father came home and sat down to his dinner; he asked,
‘Where is my son?’ The mother said nothing, but gave him a large dish of
black pudding, and Marleen still wept without ceasing.

The father again asked, ‘Where is my son?’

‘Oh,’ answered the wife, ‘he is gone into the country to his mother’s
great uncle; he is going to stay there some time.’

‘What has he gone there for, and he never even said goodbye to me!’

‘Well, he likes being there, and he told me he should be away quite six
weeks; he is well looked after there.’

‘I feel very unhappy about it,’ said the husband, ‘in case it should not
be all right, and he ought to have said goodbye to me.’

With this he went on with his dinner, and said, ‘Little Marleen, why do
you weep? Brother will soon be back.’ Then he asked his wife for more
pudding, and as he ate, he threw the bones under the table.

Little Marleen went upstairs and took her best silk handkerchief out of
her bottom drawer, and in it she wrapped all the bones from under the
table and carried them outside, and all the time she did nothing but
weep. Then she laid them in the green grass under the juniper-tree, and
she had no sooner done so, then all her sadness seemed to leave her,
and she wept no more. And now the juniper-tree began to move, and the
branches waved backwards and forwards, first away from one another, and
then together again, as it might be someone clapping their hands for
joy. After this a mist came round the tree, and in the midst of it there
was a burning as of fire, and out of the fire there flew a beautiful
bird, that rose high into the air, singing magnificently, and when it
could no more be seen, the juniper-tree stood there as before, and the
silk handkerchief and the bones were gone.

Little Marleen now felt as lighthearted and happy as if her brother were
still alive, and she went back to the house and sat down cheerfully to
the table and ate.

The bird flew away and alighted on the house of a goldsmith and began to
sing:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

The goldsmith was in his workshop making a gold chain, when he heard the
song of the bird on his roof. He thought it so beautiful that he got
up and ran out, and as he crossed the threshold he lost one of his
slippers. But he ran on into the middle of the street, with a slipper on
one foot and a sock on the other; he still had on his apron, and still
held the gold chain and the pincers in his hands, and so he stood gazing
up at the bird, while the sun came shining brightly down on the street.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘how beautifully you sing! Sing me that song again.’

‘Nay,’ said the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing. Give that gold
chain, and I will sing it you again.’

‘Here is the chain, take it,’ said the goldsmith. ‘Only sing me that
again.’

The bird flew down and took the gold chain in his right claw, and then
he alighted again in front of the goldsmith and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

Then he flew away, and settled on the roof of a shoemaker’s house and
sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

The shoemaker heard him, and he jumped up and ran out in his
shirt-sleeves, and stood looking up at the bird on the roof with his
hand over his eyes to keep himself from being blinded by the sun.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘how beautifully you sing!’ Then he called through the
door to his wife: ‘Wife, come out; here is a bird, come and look at it
and hear how beautifully it sings.’ Then he called his daughter and the
children, then the apprentices, girls and boys, and they all ran up the
street to look at the bird, and saw how splendid it was with its red
and green feathers, and its neck like burnished gold, and eyes like two
bright stars in its head.

‘Bird,’ said the shoemaker, ‘sing me that song again.’

‘Nay,’ answered the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing; you must
give me something.’

‘Wife,’ said the man, ‘go into the garret; on the upper shelf you will
see a pair of red shoes; bring them to me.’ The wife went in and fetched
the shoes.

‘There, bird,’ said the shoemaker, ‘now sing me that song again.’

The bird flew down and took the red shoes in his left claw, and then he
went back to the roof and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

When he had finished, he flew away. He had the chain in his right claw
and the shoes in his left, and he flew right away to a mill, and the
mill went ‘Click clack, click clack, click clack.’ Inside the mill were
twenty of the miller’s men hewing a stone, and as they went ‘Hick hack,
hick hack, hick hack,’ the mill went ‘Click clack, click clack, click
clack.’

The bird settled on a lime-tree in front of the mill and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

then one of the men left off,

  My father grieved when I was gone;

two more men left off and listened,

  My sister loved me best of all;

then four more left off,

  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie

now there were only eight at work,

  Underneath

And now only five,

  the juniper-tree.

And now only one,

  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

then he looked up and the last one had left off work.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘what a beautiful song that is you sing! Let me hear it
too; sing it again.’

‘Nay,’ answered the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing; give me that
millstone, and I will sing it again.’

‘If it belonged to me alone,’ said the man, ‘you should have it.’

‘Yes, yes,’ said the others: ‘if he will sing again, he can have it.’

The bird came down, and all the twenty millers set to and lifted up the
stone with a beam; then the bird put his head through the hole and took
the stone round his neck like a collar, and flew back with it to the
tree and sang--

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

And when he had finished his song, he spread his wings, and with the
chain in his right claw, the shoes in his left, and the millstone round
his neck, he flew right away to his father’s house.

The father, the mother, and little Marleen were having their dinner.

‘How lighthearted I feel,’ said the father, ‘so pleased and cheerful.’

‘And I,’ said the mother, ‘I feel so uneasy, as if a heavy thunderstorm
were coming.’

But little Marleen sat and wept and wept.

Then the bird came flying towards the house and settled on the roof.

‘I do feel so happy,’ said the father, ‘and how beautifully the sun
shines; I feel just as if I were going to see an old friend again.’

‘Ah!’ said the wife, ‘and I am so full of distress and uneasiness that
my teeth chatter, and I feel as if there were a fire in my veins,’ and
she tore open her dress; and all the while little Marleen sat in the
corner and wept, and the plate on her knees was wet with her tears.

The bird now flew to the juniper-tree and began singing:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

the mother shut her eyes and her ears, that she might see and hear
nothing, but there was a roaring sound in her ears like that of a
violent storm, and in her eyes a burning and flashing like lightning:

  My father grieved when I was gone;

‘Look, mother,’ said the man, ‘at the beautiful bird that is singing so
magnificently; and how warm and bright the sun is, and what a delicious
scent of spice in the air!’

  My sister loved me best of all;

then little Marleen laid her head down on her knees and sobbed.

‘I must go outside and see the bird nearer,’ said the man.

‘Ah, do not go!’ cried the wife. ‘I feel as if the whole house were in
flames!’

But the man went out and looked at the bird.

 She laid her kerchief over me,
 And took my bones that they might lie
 Underneath the juniper-tree
 Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

With that the bird let fall the gold chain, and it fell just round the
man’s neck, so that it fitted him exactly.

He went inside, and said, ‘See, what a splendid bird that is; he has
given me this beautiful gold chain, and looks so beautiful himself.’

But the wife was in such fear and trouble, that she fell on the floor,
and her cap fell from her head.

Then the bird began again:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

‘Ah me!’ cried the wife, ‘if I were but a thousand feet beneath the
earth, that I might not hear that song.’

  My father grieved when I was gone;

then the woman fell down again as if dead.

  My sister loved me best of all;

‘Well,’ said little Marleen, ‘I will go out too and see if the bird will
give me anything.’

So she went out.

  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie

and he threw down the shoes to her,

  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

And she now felt quite happy and lighthearted; she put on the shoes and
danced and jumped about in them. ‘I was so miserable,’ she said, ‘when I
came out, but that has all passed away; that is indeed a splendid bird,
and he has given me a pair of red shoes.’

The wife sprang up, with her hair standing out from her head like flames
of fire. ‘Then I will go out too,’ she said, ‘and see if it will lighten
my misery, for I feel as if the world were coming to an end.’

But as she crossed the threshold, crash! the bird threw the millstone
down on her head, and she was crushed to death.

The father and little Marleen heard the sound and ran out, but they only
saw mist and flame and fire rising from the spot, and when these had
passed, there stood the little brother, and he took the father and
little Marleen by the hand; then they all three rejoiced, and went
inside together and sat down to their dinners and ate.




THE TURNIP

There were two brothers who were both soldiers; the one was rich and
the other poor. The poor man thought he would try to better himself; so,
pulling off his red coat, he became a gardener, and dug his ground well,
and sowed turnips.

When the seed came up, there was one plant bigger than all the rest; and
it kept getting larger and larger, and seemed as if it would never cease
growing; so that it might have been called the prince of turnips for
there never was such a one seen before, and never will again. At last it
was so big that it filled a cart, and two oxen could hardly draw it; and
the gardener knew not what in the world to do with it, nor whether it
would be a blessing or a curse to him. One day he said to himself, ‘What
shall I do with it? if I sell it, it will bring no more than another;
and for eating, the little turnips are better than this; the best thing
perhaps is to carry it and give it to the king as a mark of respect.’

Then he yoked his oxen, and drew the turnip to the court, and gave it
to the king. ‘What a wonderful thing!’ said the king; ‘I have seen many
strange things, but such a monster as this I never saw. Where did you
get the seed? or is it only your good luck? If so, you are a true child
of fortune.’ ‘Ah, no!’ answered the gardener, ‘I am no child of fortune;
I am a poor soldier, who never could get enough to live upon; so I
laid aside my red coat, and set to work, tilling the ground. I have a
brother, who is rich, and your majesty knows him well, and all the world
knows him; but because I am poor, everybody forgets me.’

The king then took pity on him, and said, ‘You shall be poor no
longer. I will give you so much that you shall be even richer than your
brother.’ Then he gave him gold and lands and flocks, and made him so
rich that his brother’s fortune could not at all be compared with his.

When the brother heard of all this, and how a turnip had made the
gardener so rich, he envied him sorely, and bethought himself how he
could contrive to get the same good fortune for himself. However, he
determined to manage more cleverly than his brother, and got together a
rich present of gold and fine horses for the king; and thought he must
have a much larger gift in return; for if his brother had received so
much for only a turnip, what must his present be worth?

The king took the gift very graciously, and said he knew not what to
give in return more valuable and wonderful than the great turnip; so
the soldier was forced to put it into a cart, and drag it home with him.
When he reached home, he knew not upon whom to vent his rage and spite;
and at length wicked thoughts came into his head, and he resolved to
kill his brother.

So he hired some villains to murder him; and having shown them where to
lie in ambush, he went to his brother, and said, ‘Dear brother, I have
found a hidden treasure; let us go and dig it up, and share it between
us.’ The other had no suspicions of his roguery: so they went out
together, and as they were travelling along, the murderers rushed out
upon him, bound him, and were going to hang him on a tree.

But whilst they were getting all ready, they heard the trampling of a
horse at a distance, which so frightened them that they pushed their
prisoner neck and shoulders together into a sack, and swung him up by a
cord to the tree, where they left him dangling, and ran away. Meantime
he worked and worked away, till he made a hole large enough to put out
his head.

When the horseman came up, he proved to be a student, a merry fellow,
who was journeying along on his nag, and singing as he went. As soon as
the man in the sack saw him passing under the tree, he cried out, ‘Good
morning! good morning to thee, my friend!’ The student looked about
everywhere; and seeing no one, and not knowing where the voice came
from, cried out, ‘Who calls me?’

Then the man in the tree answered, ‘Lift up thine eyes, for behold here
I sit in the sack of wisdom; here have I, in a short time, learned great
and wondrous things. Compared to this seat, all the learning of the
schools is as empty air. A little longer, and I shall know all that man
can know, and shall come forth wiser than the wisest of mankind. Here
I discern the signs and motions of the heavens and the stars; the laws
that control the winds; the number of the sands on the seashore; the
healing of the sick; the virtues of all simples, of birds, and of
precious stones. Wert thou but once here, my friend, though wouldst feel
and own the power of knowledge.

The student listened to all this and wondered much; at last he said,
‘Blessed be the day and hour when I found you; cannot you contrive to
let me into the sack for a little while?’ Then the other answered, as if
very unwillingly, ‘A little space I may allow thee to sit here, if thou
wilt reward me well and entreat me kindly; but thou must tarry yet an
hour below, till I have learnt some little matters that are yet unknown
to me.’

So the student sat himself down and waited a while; but the time hung
heavy upon him, and he begged earnestly that he might ascend forthwith,
for his thirst for knowledge was great. Then the other pretended to give
way, and said, ‘Thou must let the sack of wisdom descend, by untying
yonder cord, and then thou shalt enter.’ So the student let him down,
opened the sack, and set him free. ‘Now then,’ cried he, ‘let me ascend
quickly.’ As he began to put himself into the sack heels first, ‘Wait a
while,’ said the gardener, ‘that is not the way.’ Then he pushed him
in head first, tied up the sack, and soon swung up the searcher after
wisdom dangling in the air. ‘How is it with thee, friend?’ said he,
‘dost thou not feel that wisdom comes unto thee? Rest there in peace,
till thou art a wiser man than thou wert.’

So saying, he trotted off on the student’s nag, and left the poor fellow
to gather wisdom till somebody should come and let him down.




CLEVER HANS

The mother of Hans said: ‘Whither away, Hans?’ Hans answered: ‘To
Gretel.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh, I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’
‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day,
Hans. What do you bring that is good?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want to have
something given me.’ Gretel presents Hans with a needle, Hans says:
‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the needle, sticks it into a hay-cart, and follows the cart
home. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’
‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘Took nothing; had something
given me.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a needle.’ ‘Where is the
needle, Hans?’ ‘Stuck in the hay-cart.’ ‘That was ill done, Hans. You
should have stuck the needle in your sleeve.’ ‘Never mind, I’ll do
better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What do you bring that is
good?’ ‘I bring nothing. I want to have something given to me.’ Gretel
presents Hans with a knife. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans
takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve, and goes home. ‘Good evening,
mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ What
did you take her?’ ‘Took her nothing, she gave me something.’ ‘What did
Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a knife.’ ‘Where is the knife, Hans?’ ‘Stuck
in my sleeve.’ ‘That’s ill done, Hans, you should have put the knife in
your pocket.’ ‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good thing do you
bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents
Hans with a young goat. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans takes
the goat, ties its legs, and puts it in his pocket. When he gets home it
is suffocated. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have
you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘Took nothing, she
gave me something.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘She gave me a goat.’
‘Where is the goat, Hans?’ ‘Put it in my pocket.’ ‘That was ill done,
Hans, you should have put a rope round the goat’s neck.’ ‘Never mind,
will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good thing do you
bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents
Hans with a piece of bacon. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the bacon, ties it to a rope, and drags it away behind him.
The dogs come and devour the bacon. When he gets home, he has the rope
in his hand, and there is no longer anything hanging on to it. ‘Good
evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With
Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘I took her nothing, she gave me
something.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a bit of bacon.’ ‘Where
is the bacon, Hans?’ ‘I tied it to a rope, brought it home, dogs took
it.’ ‘That was ill done, Hans, you should have carried the bacon on your
head.’ ‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘I’ll
behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to Gretel.
‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans, What good thing do you bring?’ ‘I
bring nothing, but would have something given.’ Gretel presents Hans
with a calf. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the calf, puts it on his head, and the calf kicks his face.
‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With
Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘I took nothing, but had something
given me.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘A calf.’ ‘Where have you the
calf, Hans?’ ‘I set it on my head and it kicked my face.’ ‘That was
ill done, Hans, you should have led the calf, and put it in the stall.’
‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘I’ll
behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans comes to Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good
thing do you bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, but would have something given.’
Gretel says to Hans: ‘I will go with you.’

Hans takes Gretel, ties her to a rope, leads her to the rack, and binds
her fast. Then Hans goes to his mother. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good
evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take
her?’ ‘I took her nothing.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘She gave me
nothing, she came with me.’ ‘Where have you left Gretel?’ ‘I led her by
the rope, tied her to the rack, and scattered some grass for her.’ ‘That
was ill done, Hans, you should have cast friendly eyes on her.’ ‘Never
mind, will do better.’

Hans went into the stable, cut out all the calves’ and sheep’s eyes,
and threw them in Gretel’s face. Then Gretel became angry, tore herself
loose and ran away, and was no longer the bride of Hans.




THE THREE LANGUAGES

An aged count once lived in Switzerland, who had an only son, but he
was stupid, and could learn nothing. Then said the father: ‘Hark you,
my son, try as I will I can get nothing into your head. You must go from
hence, I will give you into the care of a celebrated master, who shall
see what he can do with you.’ The youth was sent into a strange town,
and remained a whole year with the master. At the end of this time,
he came home again, and his father asked: ‘Now, my son, what have you
learnt?’ ‘Father, I have learnt what the dogs say when they bark.’ ‘Lord
have mercy on us!’ cried the father; ‘is that all you have learnt? I
will send you into another town, to another master.’ The youth was taken
thither, and stayed a year with this master likewise. When he came back
the father again asked: ‘My son, what have you learnt?’ He answered:
‘Father, I have learnt what the birds say.’ Then the father fell into a
rage and said: ‘Oh, you lost man, you have spent the precious time and
learnt nothing; are you not ashamed to appear before my eyes? I will
send you to a third master, but if you learn nothing this time also, I
will no longer be your father.’ The youth remained a whole year with the
third master also, and when he came home again, and his father inquired:
‘My son, what have you learnt?’ he answered: ‘Dear father, I have this
year learnt what the frogs croak.’ Then the father fell into the most
furious anger, sprang up, called his people thither, and said: ‘This man
is no longer my son, I drive him forth, and command you to take him
out into the forest, and kill him.’ They took him forth, but when they
should have killed him, they could not do it for pity, and let him go,
and they cut the eyes and tongue out of a deer that they might carry
them to the old man as a token.

The youth wandered on, and after some time came to a fortress where he
begged for a night’s lodging. ‘Yes,’ said the lord of the castle, ‘if
you will pass the night down there in the old tower, go thither; but I
warn you, it is at the peril of your life, for it is full of wild dogs,
which bark and howl without stopping, and at certain hours a man has to
be given to them, whom they at once devour.’ The whole district was in
sorrow and dismay because of them, and yet no one could do anything to
stop this. The youth, however, was without fear, and said: ‘Just let me
go down to the barking dogs, and give me something that I can throw to
them; they will do nothing to harm me.’ As he himself would have it so,
they gave him some food for the wild animals, and led him down to the
tower. When he went inside, the dogs did not bark at him, but wagged
their tails quite amicably around him, ate what he set before them, and
did not hurt one hair of his head. Next morning, to the astonishment of
everyone, he came out again safe and unharmed, and said to the lord of
the castle: ‘The dogs have revealed to me, in their own language, why
they dwell there, and bring evil on the land. They are bewitched, and
are obliged to watch over a great treasure which is below in the tower,
and they can have no rest until it is taken away, and I have likewise
learnt, from their discourse, how that is to be done.’ Then all who
heard this rejoiced, and the lord of the castle said he would adopt him
as a son if he accomplished it successfully. He went down again, and
as he knew what he had to do, he did it thoroughly, and brought a chest
full of gold out with him. The howling of the wild dogs was henceforth
heard no more; they had disappeared, and the country was freed from the
trouble.

After some time he took it in his head that he would travel to Rome. On
the way he passed by a marsh, in which a number of frogs were sitting
croaking. He listened to them, and when he became aware of what they
were saying, he grew very thoughtful and sad. At last he arrived in
Rome, where the Pope had just died, and there was great doubt among
the cardinals as to whom they should appoint as his successor. They at
length agreed that the person should be chosen as pope who should be
distinguished by some divine and miraculous token. And just as that was
decided on, the young count entered into the church, and suddenly two
snow-white doves flew on his shoulders and remained sitting there. The
ecclesiastics recognized therein the token from above, and asked him on
the spot if he would be pope. He was undecided, and knew not if he were
worthy of this, but the doves counselled him to do it, and at length he
said yes. Then was he anointed and consecrated, and thus was fulfilled
what he had heard from the frogs on his way, which had so affected him,
that he was to be his Holiness the Pope. Then he had to sing a mass, and
did not know one word of it, but the two doves sat continually on his
shoulders, and said it all in his ear.




THE FOX AND THE CAT

It happened that the cat met the fox in a forest, and as she thought to
herself: ‘He is clever and full of experience, and much esteemed in the
world,’ she spoke to him in a friendly way. ‘Good day, dear Mr Fox,
how are you? How is all with you? How are you getting on in these hard
times?’ The fox, full of all kinds of arrogance, looked at the cat from
head to foot, and for a long time did not know whether he would give
any answer or not. At last he said: ‘Oh, you wretched beard-cleaner, you
piebald fool, you hungry mouse-hunter, what can you be thinking of? Have
you the cheek to ask how I am getting on? What have you learnt? How
many arts do you understand?’ ‘I understand but one,’ replied the
cat, modestly. ‘What art is that?’ asked the fox. ‘When the hounds are
following me, I can spring into a tree and save myself.’ ‘Is that all?’
said the fox. ‘I am master of a hundred arts, and have into the bargain
a sackful of cunning. You make me sorry for you; come with me, I will
teach you how people get away from the hounds.’ Just then came a hunter
with four dogs. The cat sprang nimbly up a tree, and sat down at the top
of it, where the branches and foliage quite concealed her. ‘Open your
sack, Mr Fox, open your sack,’ cried the cat to him, but the dogs had
already seized him, and were holding him fast. ‘Ah, Mr Fox,’ cried the
cat. ‘You with your hundred arts are left in the lurch! Had you been
able to climb like me, you would not have lost your life.’




THE FOUR CLEVER BROTHERS

‘Dear children,’ said a poor man to his four sons, ‘I have nothing to
give you; you must go out into the wide world and try your luck. Begin
by learning some craft or another, and see how you can get on.’ So the
four brothers took their walking-sticks in their hands, and their little
bundles on their shoulders, and after bidding their father goodbye, went
all out at the gate together. When they had got on some way they came
to four crossways, each leading to a different country. Then the eldest
said, ‘Here we must part; but this day four years we will come back
to this spot, and in the meantime each must try what he can do for
himself.’

So each brother went his way; and as the eldest was hastening on a man
met him, and asked him where he was going, and what he wanted. ‘I am
going to try my luck in the world, and should like to begin by learning
some art or trade,’ answered he. ‘Then,’ said the man, ‘go with me, and
I will teach you to become the cunningest thief that ever was.’ ‘No,’
said the other, ‘that is not an honest calling, and what can one look
to earn by it in the end but the gallows?’ ‘Oh!’ said the man, ‘you need
not fear the gallows; for I will only teach you to steal what will be
fair game: I meddle with nothing but what no one else can get or care
anything about, and where no one can find you out.’ So the young man
agreed to follow his trade, and he soon showed himself so clever, that
nothing could escape him that he had once set his mind upon.

The second brother also met a man, who, when he found out what he was
setting out upon, asked him what craft he meant to follow. ‘I do not
know yet,’ said he. ‘Then come with me, and be a star-gazer. It is a
noble art, for nothing can be hidden from you, when once you understand
the stars.’ The plan pleased him much, and he soon became such a skilful
star-gazer, that when he had served out his time, and wanted to leave
his master, he gave him a glass, and said, ‘With this you can see all
that is passing in the sky and on earth, and nothing can be hidden from
you.’

The third brother met a huntsman, who took him with him, and taught him
so well all that belonged to hunting, that he became very clever in the
craft of the woods; and when he left his master he gave him a bow, and
said, ‘Whatever you shoot at with this bow you will be sure to hit.’

The youngest brother likewise met a man who asked him what he wished to
do. ‘Would not you like,’ said he, ‘to be a tailor?’ ‘Oh, no!’ said
the young man; ‘sitting cross-legged from morning to night, working
backwards and forwards with a needle and goose, will never suit me.’
‘Oh!’ answered the man, ‘that is not my sort of tailoring; come with me,
and you will learn quite another kind of craft from that.’ Not knowing
what better to do, he came into the plan, and learnt tailoring from the
beginning; and when he left his master, he gave him a needle, and said,
‘You can sew anything with this, be it as soft as an egg or as hard as
steel; and the joint will be so fine that no seam will be seen.’

After the space of four years, at the time agreed upon, the four
brothers met at the four cross-roads; and having welcomed each other,
set off towards their father’s home, where they told him all that had
happened to them, and how each had learned some craft.

Then, one day, as they were sitting before the house under a very high
tree, the father said, ‘I should like to try what each of you can do in
this way.’ So he looked up, and said to the second son, ‘At the top of
this tree there is a chaffinch’s nest; tell me how many eggs there are
in it.’ The star-gazer took his glass, looked up, and said, ‘Five.’
‘Now,’ said the father to the eldest son, ‘take away the eggs without
letting the bird that is sitting upon them and hatching them know
anything of what you are doing.’ So the cunning thief climbed up the
tree, and brought away to his father the five eggs from under the bird;
and it never saw or felt what he was doing, but kept sitting on at its
ease. Then the father took the eggs, and put one on each corner of the
table, and the fifth in the middle, and said to the huntsman, ‘Cut all
the eggs in two pieces at one shot.’ The huntsman took up his bow, and
at one shot struck all the five eggs as his father wished.

‘Now comes your turn,’ said he to the young tailor; ‘sew the eggs and
the young birds in them together again, so neatly that the shot shall
have done them no harm.’ Then the tailor took his needle, and sewed the
eggs as he was told; and when he had done, the thief was sent to take
them back to the nest, and put them under the bird without its knowing
it. Then she went on sitting, and hatched them: and in a few days they
crawled out, and had only a little red streak across their necks, where
the tailor had sewn them together.

‘Well done, sons!’ said the old man; ‘you have made good use of your
time, and learnt something worth the knowing; but I am sure I do not
know which ought to have the prize. Oh, that a time might soon come for
you to turn your skill to some account!’

Not long after this there was a great bustle in the country; for the
king’s daughter had been carried off by a mighty dragon, and the king
mourned over his loss day and night, and made it known that whoever
brought her back to him should have her for a wife. Then the four
brothers said to each other, ‘Here is a chance for us; let us try
what we can do.’ And they agreed to see whether they could not set the
princess free. ‘I will soon find out where she is, however,’ said the
star-gazer, as he looked through his glass; and he soon cried out, ‘I
see her afar off, sitting upon a rock in the sea, and I can spy the
dragon close by, guarding her.’ Then he went to the king, and asked for
a ship for himself and his brothers; and they sailed together over the
sea, till they came to the right place. There they found the princess
sitting, as the star-gazer had said, on the rock; and the dragon was
lying asleep, with his head upon her lap. ‘I dare not shoot at him,’
said the huntsman, ‘for I should kill the beautiful young lady also.’
‘Then I will try my skill,’ said the thief, and went and stole her away
from under the dragon, so quietly and gently that the beast did not know
it, but went on snoring.

Then away they hastened with her full of joy in their boat towards the
ship; but soon came the dragon roaring behind them through the air; for
he awoke and missed the princess. But when he got over the boat, and
wanted to pounce upon them and carry off the princess, the huntsman took
up his bow and shot him straight through the heart so that he fell down
dead. They were still not safe; for he was such a great beast that in
his fall he overset the boat, and they had to swim in the open sea
upon a few planks. So the tailor took his needle, and with a few large
stitches put some of the planks together; and he sat down upon these,
and sailed about and gathered up all pieces of the boat; and then tacked
them together so quickly that the boat was soon ready, and they then
reached the ship and got home safe.

When they had brought home the princess to her father, there was great
rejoicing; and he said to the four brothers, ‘One of you shall marry
her, but you must settle amongst yourselves which it is to be.’ Then
there arose a quarrel between them; and the star-gazer said, ‘If I had
not found the princess out, all your skill would have been of no use;
therefore she ought to be mine.’ ‘Your seeing her would have been of
no use,’ said the thief, ‘if I had not taken her away from the dragon;
therefore she ought to be mine.’ ‘No, she is mine,’ said the huntsman;
‘for if I had not killed the dragon, he would, after all, have torn you
and the princess into pieces.’ ‘And if I had not sewn the boat together
again,’ said the tailor, ‘you would all have been drowned, therefore she
is mine.’ Then the king put in a word, and said, ‘Each of you is right;
and as all cannot have the young lady, the best way is for neither of
you to have her: for the truth is, there is somebody she likes a great
deal better. But to make up for your loss, I will give each of you, as a
reward for his skill, half a kingdom.’ So the brothers agreed that this
plan would be much better than either quarrelling or marrying a lady who
had no mind to have them. And the king then gave to each half a kingdom,
as he had said; and they lived very happily the rest of their days, and
took good care of their father; and somebody took better care of the
young lady, than to let either the dragon or one of the craftsmen have
her again.




LILY AND THE LION

A merchant, who had three daughters, was once setting out upon a
journey; but before he went he asked each daughter what gift he should
bring back for her. The eldest wished for pearls; the second for jewels;
but the third, who was called Lily, said, ‘Dear father, bring me a
rose.’ Now it was no easy task to find a rose, for it was the middle
of winter; yet as she was his prettiest daughter, and was very fond of
flowers, her father said he would try what he could do. So he kissed all
three, and bid them goodbye.

And when the time came for him to go home, he had bought pearls and
jewels for the two eldest, but he had sought everywhere in vain for the
rose; and when he went into any garden and asked for such a thing, the
people laughed at him, and asked him whether he thought roses grew in
snow. This grieved him very much, for Lily was his dearest child; and as
he was journeying home, thinking what he should bring her, he came to a
fine castle; and around the castle was a garden, in one half of which it
seemed to be summer-time and in the other half winter. On one side the
finest flowers were in full bloom, and on the other everything looked
dreary and buried in the snow. ‘A lucky hit!’ said he, as he called to
his servant, and told him to go to a beautiful bed of roses that was
there, and bring him away one of the finest flowers.

This done, they were riding away well pleased, when up sprang a fierce
lion, and roared out, ‘Whoever has stolen my roses shall be eaten up
alive!’ Then the man said, ‘I knew not that the garden belonged to you;
can nothing save my life?’ ‘No!’ said the lion, ‘nothing, unless you
undertake to give me whatever meets you on your return home; if you
agree to this, I will give you your life, and the rose too for your
daughter.’ But the man was unwilling to do so and said, ‘It may be my
youngest daughter, who loves me most, and always runs to meet me when
I go home.’ Then the servant was greatly frightened, and said, ‘It may
perhaps be only a cat or a dog.’ And at last the man yielded with a
heavy heart, and took the rose; and said he would give the lion whatever
should meet him first on his return.

And as he came near home, it was Lily, his youngest and dearest
daughter, that met him; she came running, and kissed him, and welcomed
him home; and when she saw that he had brought her the rose, she was
still more glad. But her father began to be very sorrowful, and to weep,
saying, ‘Alas, my dearest child! I have bought this flower at a high
price, for I have said I would give you to a wild lion; and when he has
you, he will tear you in pieces, and eat you.’ Then he told her all that
had happened, and said she should not go, let what would happen.

But she comforted him, and said, ‘Dear father, the word you have given
must be kept; I will go to the lion, and soothe him: perhaps he will let
me come safe home again.’

The next morning she asked the way she was to go, and took leave of her
father, and went forth with a bold heart into the wood. But the lion was
an enchanted prince. By day he and all his court were lions, but in the
evening they took their right forms again. And when Lily came to the
castle, he welcomed her so courteously that she agreed to marry him. The
wedding-feast was held, and they lived happily together a long time. The
prince was only to be seen as soon as evening came, and then he held his
court; but every morning he left his bride, and went away by himself,
she knew not whither, till the night came again.

After some time he said to her, ‘Tomorrow there will be a great feast in
your father’s house, for your eldest sister is to be married; and if
you wish to go and visit her my lions shall lead you thither.’ Then she
rejoiced much at the thoughts of seeing her father once more, and set
out with the lions; and everyone was overjoyed to see her, for they had
thought her dead long since. But she told them how happy she was, and
stayed till the feast was over, and then went back to the wood.

Her second sister was soon after married, and when Lily was asked to
go to the wedding, she said to the prince, ‘I will not go alone this
time--you must go with me.’ But he would not, and said that it would be
a very hazardous thing; for if the least ray of the torch-light should
fall upon him his enchantment would become still worse, for he should be
changed into a dove, and be forced to wander about the world for seven
long years. However, she gave him no rest, and said she would take care
no light should fall upon him. So at last they set out together, and
took with them their little child; and she chose a large hall with thick
walls for him to sit in while the wedding-torches were lighted; but,
unluckily, no one saw that there was a crack in the door. Then the
wedding was held with great pomp, but as the train came from the church,
and passed with the torches before the hall, a very small ray of light
fell upon the prince. In a moment he disappeared, and when his wife came
in and looked for him, she found only a white dove; and it said to her,
‘Seven years must I fly up and down over the face of the earth, but
every now and then I will let fall a white feather, that will show you
the way I am going; follow it, and at last you may overtake and set me
free.’

This said, he flew out at the door, and poor Lily followed; and every
now and then a white feather fell, and showed her the way she was to
journey. Thus she went roving on through the wide world, and looked
neither to the right hand nor to the left, nor took any rest, for seven
years. Then she began to be glad, and thought to herself that the time
was fast coming when all her troubles should end; yet repose was still
far off, for one day as she was travelling on she missed the white
feather, and when she lifted up her eyes she could nowhere see the dove.
‘Now,’ thought she to herself, ‘no aid of man can be of use to me.’ So
she went to the sun and said, ‘Thou shinest everywhere, on the hill’s
top and the valley’s depth--hast thou anywhere seen my white dove?’
‘No,’ said the sun, ‘I have not seen it; but I will give thee a
casket--open it when thy hour of need comes.’

So she thanked the sun, and went on her way till eventide; and when
the moon arose, she cried unto it, and said, ‘Thou shinest through the
night, over field and grove--hast thou nowhere seen my white dove?’
‘No,’ said the moon, ‘I cannot help thee but I will give thee an
egg--break it when need comes.’

Then she thanked the moon, and went on till the night-wind blew; and she
raised up her voice to it, and said, ‘Thou blowest through every tree
and under every leaf--hast thou not seen my white dove?’ ‘No,’ said the
night-wind, ‘but I will ask three other winds; perhaps they have seen
it.’ Then the east wind and the west wind came, and said they too had
not seen it, but the south wind said, ‘I have seen the white dove--he
has fled to the Red Sea, and is changed once more into a lion, for the
seven years are passed away, and there he is fighting with a dragon;
and the dragon is an enchanted princess, who seeks to separate him from
you.’ Then the night-wind said, ‘I will give thee counsel. Go to the
Red Sea; on the right shore stand many rods--count them, and when thou
comest to the eleventh, break it off, and smite the dragon with it; and
so the lion will have the victory, and both of them will appear to you
in their own forms. Then look round and thou wilt see a griffin, winged
like bird, sitting by the Red Sea; jump on to his back with thy beloved
one as quickly as possible, and he will carry you over the waters to
your home. I will also give thee this nut,’ continued the night-wind.
‘When you are half-way over, throw it down, and out of the waters will
immediately spring up a high nut-tree on which the griffin will be able
to rest, otherwise he would not have the strength to bear you the whole
way; if, therefore, thou dost forget to throw down the nut, he will let
you both fall into the sea.’

So our poor wanderer went forth, and found all as the night-wind had
said; and she plucked the eleventh rod, and smote the dragon, and the
lion forthwith became a prince, and the dragon a princess again. But
no sooner was the princess released from the spell, than she seized
the prince by the arm and sprang on to the griffin’s back, and went off
carrying the prince away with her.

Thus the unhappy traveller was again forsaken and forlorn; but she
took heart and said, ‘As far as the wind blows, and so long as the cock
crows, I will journey on, till I find him once again.’ She went on for
a long, long way, till at length she came to the castle whither the
princess had carried the prince; and there was a feast got ready, and
she heard that the wedding was about to be held. ‘Heaven aid me now!’
said she; and she took the casket that the sun had given her, and found
that within it lay a dress as dazzling as the sun itself. So she put it
on, and went into the palace, and all the people gazed upon her; and
the dress pleased the bride so much that she asked whether it was to be
sold. ‘Not for gold and silver.’ said she, ‘but for flesh and blood.’
The princess asked what she meant, and she said, ‘Let me speak with the
bridegroom this night in his chamber, and I will give thee the dress.’
At last the princess agreed, but she told her chamberlain to give the
prince a sleeping draught, that he might not hear or see her. When
evening came, and the prince had fallen asleep, she was led into
his chamber, and she sat herself down at his feet, and said: ‘I have
followed thee seven years. I have been to the sun, the moon, and the
night-wind, to seek thee, and at last I have helped thee to overcome
the dragon. Wilt thou then forget me quite?’ But the prince all the time
slept so soundly, that her voice only passed over him, and seemed like
the whistling of the wind among the fir-trees.

Then poor Lily was led away, and forced to give up the golden dress; and
when she saw that there was no help for her, she went out into a meadow,
and sat herself down and wept. But as she sat she bethought herself of
the egg that the moon had given her; and when she broke it, there ran
out a hen and twelve chickens of pure gold, that played about, and then
nestled under the old one’s wings, so as to form the most beautiful
sight in the world. And she rose up and drove them before her, till the
bride saw them from her window, and was so pleased that she came forth
and asked her if she would sell the brood. ‘Not for gold or silver, but
for flesh and blood: let me again this evening speak with the bridegroom
in his chamber, and I will give thee the whole brood.’

Then the princess thought to betray her as before, and agreed to
what she asked: but when the prince went to his chamber he asked
the chamberlain why the wind had whistled so in the night. And the
chamberlain told him all--how he had given him a sleeping draught, and
how a poor maiden had come and spoken to him in his chamber, and was
to come again that night. Then the prince took care to throw away the
sleeping draught; and when Lily came and began again to tell him what
woes had befallen her, and how faithful and true to him she had been,
he knew his beloved wife’s voice, and sprang up, and said, ‘You have
awakened me as from a dream, for the strange princess had thrown a spell
around me, so that I had altogether forgotten you; but Heaven hath sent
you to me in a lucky hour.’

And they stole away out of the palace by night unawares, and seated
themselves on the griffin, who flew back with them over the Red Sea.
When they were half-way across Lily let the nut fall into the water,
and immediately a large nut-tree arose from the sea, whereon the griffin
rested for a while, and then carried them safely home. There they found
their child, now grown up to be comely and fair; and after all their
troubles they lived happily together to the end of their days.




THE FOX AND THE HORSE

A farmer had a horse that had been an excellent faithful servant to
him: but he was now grown too old to work; so the farmer would give him
nothing more to eat, and said, ‘I want you no longer, so take yourself
off out of my stable; I shall not take you back again until you are
stronger than a lion.’ Then he opened the door and turned him adrift.

The poor horse was very melancholy, and wandered up and down in the
wood, seeking some little shelter from the cold wind and rain. Presently
a fox met him: ‘What’s the matter, my friend?’ said he, ‘why do you hang
down your head and look so lonely and woe-begone?’ ‘Ah!’ replied the
horse, ‘justice and avarice never dwell in one house; my master has
forgotten all that I have done for him so many years, and because I
can no longer work he has turned me adrift, and says unless I become
stronger than a lion he will not take me back again; what chance can I
have of that? he knows I have none, or he would not talk so.’

However, the fox bid him be of good cheer, and said, ‘I will help you;
lie down there, stretch yourself out quite stiff, and pretend to be
dead.’ The horse did as he was told, and the fox went straight to the
lion who lived in a cave close by, and said to him, ‘A little way off
lies a dead horse; come with me and you may make an excellent meal of
his carcase.’ The lion was greatly pleased, and set off immediately; and
when they came to the horse, the fox said, ‘You will not be able to eat
him comfortably here; I’ll tell you what--I will tie you fast to
his tail, and then you can draw him to your den, and eat him at your
leisure.’

This advice pleased the lion, so he laid himself down quietly for the
fox to make him fast to the horse. But the fox managed to tie his legs
together and bound all so hard and fast that with all his strength he
could not set himself free. When the work was done, the fox clapped the
horse on the shoulder, and said, ‘Jip! Dobbin! Jip!’ Then up he sprang,
and moved off, dragging the lion behind him. The beast began to roar
and bellow, till all the birds of the wood flew away for fright; but the
horse let him sing on, and made his way quietly over the fields to his
master’s house.

‘Here he is, master,’ said he, ‘I have got the better of him’: and when
the farmer saw his old servant, his heart relented, and he said. ‘Thou
shalt stay in thy stable and be well taken care of.’ And so the poor old
horse had plenty to eat, and lived--till he died.




THE BLUE LIGHT

There was once upon a time a soldier who for many years had served the
king faithfully, but when the war came to an end could serve no longer
because of the many wounds which he had received. The king said to him:
‘You may return to your home, I need you no longer, and you will not
receive any more money, for he only receives wages who renders me
service for them.’ Then the soldier did not know how to earn a living,
went away greatly troubled, and walked the whole day, until in the
evening he entered a forest. When darkness came on, he saw a light,
which he went up to, and came to a house wherein lived a witch. ‘Do give
me one night’s lodging, and a little to eat and drink,’ said he to
her, ‘or I shall starve.’ ‘Oho!’ she answered, ‘who gives anything to a
run-away soldier? Yet will I be compassionate, and take you in, if you
will do what I wish.’ ‘What do you wish?’ said the soldier. ‘That you
should dig all round my garden for me, tomorrow.’ The soldier consented,
and next day laboured with all his strength, but could not finish it by
the evening. ‘I see well enough,’ said the witch, ‘that you can do no
more today, but I will keep you yet another night, in payment for
which you must tomorrow chop me a load of wood, and chop it small.’ The
soldier spent the whole day in doing it, and in the evening the witch
proposed that he should stay one night more. ‘Tomorrow, you shall only
do me a very trifling piece of work. Behind my house, there is an old
dry well, into which my light has fallen, it burns blue, and never goes
out, and you shall bring it up again.’ Next day the old woman took him
to the well, and let him down in a basket. He found the blue light, and
made her a signal to draw him up again. She did draw him up, but when he
came near the edge, she stretched down her hand and wanted to take the
blue light away from him. ‘No,’ said he, perceiving her evil intention,
‘I will not give you the light until I am standing with both feet upon
the ground.’ The witch fell into a passion, let him fall again into the
well, and went away.

The poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground, and the blue
light went on burning, but of what use was that to him? He saw very well
that he could not escape death. He sat for a while very sorrowfully,
then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, which
was still half full. ‘This shall be my last pleasure,’ thought he,
pulled it out, lit it at the blue light and began to smoke. When the
smoke had circled about the cavern, suddenly a little black dwarf stood
before him, and said: ‘Lord, what are your commands?’ ‘What my commands
are?’ replied the soldier, quite astonished. ‘I must do everything you
bid me,’ said the little man. ‘Good,’ said the soldier; ‘then in the
first place help me out of this well.’ The little man took him by the
hand, and led him through an underground passage, but he did not forget
to take the blue light with him. On the way the dwarf showed him the
treasures which the witch had collected and hidden there, and the
soldier took as much gold as he could carry. When he was above, he said
to the little man: ‘Now go and bind the old witch, and carry her before
the judge.’ In a short time she came by like the wind, riding on a wild
tom-cat and screaming frightfully. Nor was it long before the little man
reappeared. ‘It is all done,’ said he, ‘and the witch is already hanging
on the gallows. What further commands has my lord?’ inquired the dwarf.
‘At this moment, none,’ answered the soldier; ‘you can return home, only
be at hand immediately, if I summon you.’ ‘Nothing more is needed than
that you should light your pipe at the blue light, and I will appear
before you at once.’ Thereupon he vanished from his sight.

The soldier returned to the town from which he came. He went to the
best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then bade the landlord
furnish him a room as handsome as possible. When it was ready and the
soldier had taken possession of it, he summoned the little black manikin
and said: ‘I have served the king faithfully, but he has dismissed me,
and left me to hunger, and now I want to take my revenge.’ ‘What am I to
do?’ asked the little man. ‘Late at night, when the king’s daughter is
in bed, bring her here in her sleep, she shall do servant’s work for
me.’ The manikin said: ‘That is an easy thing for me to do, but a very
dangerous thing for you, for if it is discovered, you will fare ill.’
When twelve o’clock had struck, the door sprang open, and the manikin
carried in the princess. ‘Aha! are you there?’ cried the soldier, ‘get
to your work at once! Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber.’ When
she had done this, he ordered her to come to his chair, and then he
stretched out his feet and said: ‘Pull off my boots,’ and then he
threw them in her face, and made her pick them up again, and clean
and brighten them. She, however, did everything he bade her, without
opposition, silently and with half-shut eyes. When the first cock
crowed, the manikin carried her back to the royal palace, and laid her
in her bed.

Next morning when the princess arose she went to her father, and told
him that she had had a very strange dream. ‘I was carried through the
streets with the rapidity of lightning,’ said she, ‘and taken into a
soldier’s room, and I had to wait upon him like a servant, sweep his
room, clean his boots, and do all kinds of menial work. It was only a
dream, and yet I am just as tired as if I really had done everything.’
‘The dream may have been true,’ said the king. ‘I will give you a piece
of advice. Fill your pocket full of peas, and make a small hole in the
pocket, and then if you are carried away again, they will fall out and
leave a track in the streets.’ But unseen by the king, the manikin was
standing beside him when he said that, and heard all. At night when
the sleeping princess was again carried through the streets, some peas
certainly did fall out of her pocket, but they made no track, for the
crafty manikin had just before scattered peas in every street there
was. And again the princess was compelled to do servant’s work until
cock-crow.

Next morning the king sent his people out to seek the track, but it was
all in vain, for in every street poor children were sitting, picking up
peas, and saying: ‘It must have rained peas, last night.’ ‘We must think
of something else,’ said the king; ‘keep your shoes on when you go to
bed, and before you come back from the place where you are taken, hide
one of them there, I will soon contrive to find it.’ The black manikin
heard this plot, and at night when the soldier again ordered him to
bring the princess, revealed it to him, and told him that he knew of no
expedient to counteract this stratagem, and that if the shoe were found
in the soldier’s house it would go badly with him. ‘Do what I bid you,’
replied the soldier, and again this third night the princess was obliged
to work like a servant, but before she went away, she hid her shoe under
the bed.

Next morning the king had the entire town searched for his daughter’s
shoe. It was found at the soldier’s, and the soldier himself, who at the
entreaty of the dwarf had gone outside the gate, was soon brought back,
and thrown into prison. In his flight he had forgotten the most valuable
things he had, the blue light and the gold, and had only one ducat in
his pocket. And now loaded with chains, he was standing at the window of
his dungeon, when he chanced to see one of his comrades passing by. The
soldier tapped at the pane of glass, and when this man came up, said to
him: ‘Be so kind as to fetch me the small bundle I have left lying in
the inn, and I will give you a ducat for doing it.’ His comrade ran
thither and brought him what he wanted. As soon as the soldier was alone
again, he lighted his pipe and summoned the black manikin. ‘Have no
fear,’ said the latter to his master. ‘Go wheresoever they take you, and
let them do what they will, only take the blue light with you.’ Next day
the soldier was tried, and though he had done nothing wicked, the judge
condemned him to death. When he was led forth to die, he begged a last
favour of the king. ‘What is it?’ asked the king. ‘That I may smoke one
more pipe on my way.’ ‘You may smoke three,’ answered the king, ‘but do
not imagine that I will spare your life.’ Then the soldier pulled out
his pipe and lighted it at the blue light, and as soon as a few wreaths
of smoke had ascended, the manikin was there with a small cudgel in his
hand, and said: ‘What does my lord command?’ ‘Strike down to earth that
false judge there, and his constable, and spare not the king who has
treated me so ill.’ Then the manikin fell on them like lightning,
darting this way and that way, and whosoever was so much as touched by
his cudgel fell to earth, and did not venture to stir again. The king
was terrified; he threw himself on the soldier’s mercy, and merely to
be allowed to live at all, gave him his kingdom for his own, and his
daughter to wife.




THE RAVEN

There was once a queen who had a little daughter, still too young to run
alone. One day the child was very troublesome, and the mother could not
quiet it, do what she would. She grew impatient, and seeing the ravens
flying round the castle, she opened the window, and said: ‘I wish you
were a raven and would fly away, then I should have a little peace.’
Scarcely were the words out of her mouth, when the child in her arms was
turned into a raven, and flew away from her through the open window. The
bird took its flight to a dark wood and remained there for a long time,
and meanwhile the parents could hear nothing of their child.

Long after this, a man was making his way through the wood when he heard
a raven calling, and he followed the sound of the voice. As he drew
near, the raven said, ‘I am by birth a king’s daughter, but am now under
the spell of some enchantment; you can, however, set me free.’ ‘What
am I to do?’ he asked. She replied, ‘Go farther into the wood until you
come to a house, wherein lives an old woman; she will offer you food and
drink, but you must not take of either; if you do, you will fall into
a deep sleep, and will not be able to help me. In the garden behind the
house is a large tan-heap, and on that you must stand and watch for me.
I shall drive there in my carriage at two o’clock in the afternoon for
three successive days; the first day it will be drawn by four white, the
second by four chestnut, and the last by four black horses; but if you
fail to keep awake and I find you sleeping, I shall not be set free.’

The man promised to do all that she wished, but the raven said, ‘Alas! I
know even now that you will take something from the woman and be unable
to save me.’ The man assured her again that he would on no account touch
a thing to eat or drink.

When he came to the house and went inside, the old woman met him, and
said, ‘Poor man! how tired you are! Come in and rest and let me give you
something to eat and drink.’

‘No,’ answered the man, ‘I will neither eat not drink.’

But she would not leave him alone, and urged him saying, ‘If you will
not eat anything, at least you might take a draught of wine; one drink
counts for nothing,’ and at last he allowed himself to be persuaded, and
drank.

As it drew towards the appointed hour, he went outside into the garden
and mounted the tan-heap to await the raven. Suddenly a feeling of
fatigue came over him, and unable to resist it, he lay down for a little
while, fully determined, however, to keep awake; but in another minute
his eyes closed of their own accord, and he fell into such a deep sleep,
that all the noises in the world would not have awakened him. At two
o’clock the raven came driving along, drawn by her four white horses;
but even before she reached the spot, she said to herself, sighing, ‘I
know he has fallen asleep.’ When she entered the garden, there she found
him as she had feared, lying on the tan-heap, fast asleep. She got out
of her carriage and went to him; she called him and shook him, but it
was all in vain, he still continued sleeping.

The next day at noon, the old woman came to him again with food and
drink which he at first refused. At last, overcome by her persistent
entreaties that he would take something, he lifted the glass and drank
again.

Towards two o’clock he went into the garden and on to the tan-heap to
watch for the raven. He had not been there long before he began to feel
so tired that his limbs seemed hardly able to support him, and he could
not stand upright any longer; so again he lay down and fell fast asleep.
As the raven drove along her four chestnut horses, she said sorrowfully
to herself, ‘I know he has fallen asleep.’ She went as before to look
for him, but he slept, and it was impossible to awaken him.

The following day the old woman said to him, ‘What is this? You are not
eating or drinking anything, do you want to kill yourself?’

He answered, ‘I may not and will not either eat or drink.’

But she put down the dish of food and the glass of wine in front of him,
and when he smelt the wine, he was unable to resist the temptation, and
took a deep draught.

When the hour came round again he went as usual on to the tan-heap in
the garden to await the king’s daughter, but he felt even more overcome
with weariness than on the two previous days, and throwing himself down,
he slept like a log. At two o’clock the raven could be seen approaching,
and this time her coachman and everything about her, as well as her
horses, were black.

She was sadder than ever as she drove along, and said mournfully, ‘I
know he has fallen asleep, and will not be able to set me free.’ She
found him sleeping heavily, and all her efforts to awaken him were of no
avail. Then she placed beside him a loaf, and some meat, and a flask
of wine, of such a kind, that however much he took of them, they would
never grow less. After that she drew a gold ring, on which her name was
engraved, off her finger, and put it upon one of his. Finally, she laid
a letter near him, in which, after giving him particulars of the food
and drink she had left for him, she finished with the following words:
‘I see that as long as you remain here you will never be able to set me
free; if, however, you still wish to do so, come to the golden castle
of Stromberg; this is well within your power to accomplish.’ She then
returned to her carriage and drove to the golden castle of Stromberg.

When the man awoke and found that he had been sleeping, he was grieved
at heart, and said, ‘She has no doubt been here and driven away again,
and it is now too late for me to save her.’ Then his eyes fell on the
things which were lying beside him; he read the letter, and knew from it
all that had happened. He rose up without delay, eager to start on his
way and to reach the castle of Stromberg, but he had no idea in which
direction he ought to go. He travelled about a long time in search of it
and came at last to a dark forest, through which he went on walking for
fourteen days and still could not find a way out. Once more the night
came on, and worn out he lay down under a bush and fell asleep. Again
the next day he pursued his way through the forest, and that evening,
thinking to rest again, he lay down as before, but he heard such a
howling and wailing that he found it impossible to sleep. He waited till
it was darker and people had begun to light up their houses, and then
seeing a little glimmer ahead of him, he went towards it.

He found that the light came from a house which looked smaller than
it really was, from the contrast of its height with that of an immense
giant who stood in front of it. He thought to himself, ‘If the giant
sees me going in, my life will not be worth much.’ However, after a
while he summoned up courage and went forward. When the giant saw him,
he called out, ‘It is lucky for that you have come, for I have not had
anything to eat for a long time. I can have you now for my supper.’ ‘I
would rather you let that alone,’ said the man, ‘for I do not willingly
give myself up to be eaten; if you are wanting food I have enough to
satisfy your hunger.’ ‘If that is so,’ replied the giant, ‘I will leave
you in peace; I only thought of eating you because I had nothing else.’

So they went indoors together and sat down, and the man brought out the
bread, meat, and wine, which although he had eaten and drunk of them,
were still unconsumed. The giant was pleased with the good cheer, and
ate and drank to his heart’s content. When he had finished his supper
the man asked him if he could direct him to the castle of Stromberg.
The giant said, ‘I will look on my map; on it are marked all the towns,
villages, and houses.’ So he fetched his map, and looked for the castle,
but could not find it. ‘Never mind,’ he said, ‘I have larger maps
upstairs in the cupboard, we will look on those,’ but they searched in
vain, for the castle was not marked even on these. The man now thought
he should like to continue his journey, but the giant begged him to
remain for a day or two longer until the return of his brother, who was
away in search of provisions. When the brother came home, they asked him
about the castle of Stromberg, and he told them he would look on his own
maps as soon as he had eaten and appeased his hunger. Accordingly, when
he had finished his supper, they all went up together to his room and
looked through his maps, but the castle was not to be found. Then he
fetched other older maps, and they went on looking for the castle until
at last they found it, but it was many thousand miles away. ‘How shall I
be able to get there?’ asked the man. ‘I have two hours to spare,’ said
the giant, ‘and I will carry you into the neighbourhood of the castle; I
must then return to look after the child who is in our care.’

The giant, thereupon, carried the man to within about a hundred leagues
of the castle, where he left him, saying, ‘You will be able to walk the
remainder of the way yourself.’ The man journeyed on day and night
till he reached the golden castle of Stromberg. He found it situated,
however, on a glass mountain, and looking up from the foot he saw the
enchanted maiden drive round her castle and then go inside. He was
overjoyed to see her, and longed to get to the top of the mountain, but
the sides were so slippery that every time he attempted to climb he
fell back again. When he saw that it was impossible to reach her, he was
greatly grieved, and said to himself, ‘I will remain here and wait for
her,’ so he built himself a little hut, and there he sat and watched for
a whole year, and every day he saw the king’s daughter driving round her
castle, but still was unable to get nearer to her.

Looking out from his hut one day he saw three robbers fighting and he
called out to them, ‘God be with you.’ They stopped when they heard the
call, but looking round and seeing nobody, they went on again with their
fighting, which now became more furious. ‘God be with you,’ he cried
again, and again they paused and looked about, but seeing no one went
back to their fighting. A third time he called out, ‘God be with you,’
and then thinking he should like to know the cause of dispute between
the three men, he went out and asked them why they were fighting so
angrily with one another. One of them said that he had found a stick,
and that he had but to strike it against any door through which he
wished to pass, and it immediately flew open. Another told him that he
had found a cloak which rendered its wearer invisible; and the third had
caught a horse which would carry its rider over any obstacle, and even
up the glass mountain. They had been unable to decide whether they
would keep together and have the things in common, or whether they would
separate. On hearing this, the man said, ‘I will give you something in
exchange for those three things; not money, for that I have not got,
but something that is of far more value. I must first, however, prove
whether all you have told me about your three things is true.’ The
robbers, therefore, made him get on the horse, and handed him the stick
and the cloak, and when he had put this round him he was no longer
visible. Then he fell upon them with the stick and beat them one after
another, crying, ‘There, you idle vagabonds, you have got what you
deserve; are you satisfied now!’

After this he rode up the glass mountain. When he reached the gate of
the castle, he found it closed, but he gave it a blow with his stick,
and it flew wide open at once and he passed through. He mounted the
steps and entered the room where the maiden was sitting, with a golden
goblet full of wine in front of her. She could not see him for he still
wore his cloak. He took the ring which she had given him off his finger,
and threw it into the goblet, so that it rang as it touched the bottom.
‘That is my own ring,’ she exclaimed, ‘and if that is so the man must
also be here who is coming to set me free.’

She sought for him about the castle, but could find him nowhere.
Meanwhile he had gone outside again and mounted his horse and thrown off
the cloak. When therefore she came to the castle gate she saw him, and
cried aloud for joy. Then he dismounted and took her in his arms; and
she kissed him, and said, ‘Now you have indeed set me free, and tomorrow
we will celebrate our marriage.’




THE GOLDEN GOOSE

There was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was called
Dummling,[*] and was despised, mocked, and sneered at on every occasion.

It happened that the eldest wanted to go into the forest to hew wood,
and before he went his mother gave him a beautiful sweet cake and a
bottle of wine in order that he might not suffer from hunger or thirst.

When he entered the forest he met a little grey-haired old man who bade
him good day, and said: ‘Do give me a piece of cake out of your pocket,
and let me have a draught of your wine; I am so hungry and thirsty.’ But
the clever son answered: ‘If I give you my cake and wine, I shall have
none for myself; be off with you,’ and he left the little man standing
and went on.

But when he began to hew down a tree, it was not long before he made a
false stroke, and the axe cut him in the arm, so that he had to go home
and have it bound up. And this was the little grey man’s doing.

After this the second son went into the forest, and his mother gave him,
like the eldest, a cake and a bottle of wine. The little old grey man
met him likewise, and asked him for a piece of cake and a drink of wine.
But the second son, too, said sensibly enough: ‘What I give you will be
taken away from myself; be off!’ and he left the little man standing and
went on. His punishment, however, was not delayed; when he had made a
few blows at the tree he struck himself in the leg, so that he had to be
carried home.

Then Dummling said: ‘Father, do let me go and cut wood.’ The father
answered: ‘Your brothers have hurt themselves with it, leave it alone,
you do not understand anything about it.’ But Dummling begged so long
that at last he said: ‘Just go then, you will get wiser by hurting
yourself.’ His mother gave him a cake made with water and baked in the
cinders, and with it a bottle of sour beer.

When he came to the forest the little old grey man met him likewise,
and greeting him, said: ‘Give me a piece of your cake and a drink out
of your bottle; I am so hungry and thirsty.’ Dummling answered: ‘I have
only cinder-cake and sour beer; if that pleases you, we will sit
down and eat.’ So they sat down, and when Dummling pulled out his
cinder-cake, it was a fine sweet cake, and the sour beer had become good
wine. So they ate and drank, and after that the little man said: ‘Since
you have a good heart, and are willing to divide what you have, I will
give you good luck. There stands an old tree, cut it down, and you will
find something at the roots.’ Then the little man took leave of him.

Dummling went and cut down the tree, and when it fell there was a goose
sitting in the roots with feathers of pure gold. He lifted her up, and
taking her with him, went to an inn where he thought he would stay the
night. Now the host had three daughters, who saw the goose and were
curious to know what such a wonderful bird might be, and would have
liked to have one of its golden feathers.

The eldest thought: ‘I shall soon find an opportunity of pulling out a
feather,’ and as soon as Dummling had gone out she seized the goose by
the wing, but her finger and hand remained sticking fast to it.

The second came soon afterwards, thinking only of how she might get a
feather for herself, but she had scarcely touched her sister than she
was held fast.

At last the third also came with the like intent, and the others
screamed out: ‘Keep away; for goodness’ sake keep away!’ But she did
not understand why she was to keep away. ‘The others are there,’ she
thought, ‘I may as well be there too,’ and ran to them; but as soon as
she had touched her sister, she remained sticking fast to her. So they
had to spend the night with the goose.

The next morning Dummling took the goose under his arm and set out,
without troubling himself about the three girls who were hanging on to
it. They were obliged to run after him continually, now left, now right,
wherever his legs took him.

In the middle of the fields the parson met them, and when he saw the
procession he said: ‘For shame, you good-for-nothing girls, why are you
running across the fields after this young man? Is that seemly?’ At the
same time he seized the youngest by the hand in order to pull her away,
but as soon as he touched her he likewise stuck fast, and was himself
obliged to run behind.

Before long the sexton came by and saw his master, the parson, running
behind three girls. He was astonished at this and called out: ‘Hi!
your reverence, whither away so quickly? Do not forget that we have a
christening today!’ and running after him he took him by the sleeve, but
was also held fast to it.

Whilst the five were trotting thus one behind the other, two labourers
came with their hoes from the fields; the parson called out to them
and begged that they would set him and the sexton free. But they had
scarcely touched the sexton when they were held fast, and now there were
seven of them running behind Dummling and the goose.

Soon afterwards he came to a city, where a king ruled who had a daughter
who was so serious that no one could make her laugh. So he had put forth
a decree that whosoever should be able to make her laugh should marry
her. When Dummling heard this, he went with his goose and all her train
before the king’s daughter, and as soon as she saw the seven people
running on and on, one behind the other, she began to laugh quite
loudly, and as if she would never stop. Thereupon Dummling asked to have
her for his wife; but the king did not like the son-in-law, and made all
manner of excuses and said he must first produce a man who could drink
a cellarful of wine. Dummling thought of the little grey man, who could
certainly help him; so he went into the forest, and in the same place
where he had felled the tree, he saw a man sitting, who had a very
sorrowful face. Dummling asked him what he was taking to heart so
sorely, and he answered: ‘I have such a great thirst and cannot quench
it; cold water I cannot stand, a barrel of wine I have just emptied, but
that to me is like a drop on a hot stone!’

‘There, I can help you,’ said Dummling, ‘just come with me and you shall
be satisfied.’

He led him into the king’s cellar, and the man bent over the huge
barrels, and drank and drank till his loins hurt, and before the day was
out he had emptied all the barrels. Then Dummling asked once more
for his bride, but the king was vexed that such an ugly fellow, whom
everyone called Dummling, should take away his daughter, and he made a
new condition; he must first find a man who could eat a whole mountain
of bread. Dummling did not think long, but went straight into the
forest, where in the same place there sat a man who was tying up his
body with a strap, and making an awful face, and saying: ‘I have eaten a
whole ovenful of rolls, but what good is that when one has such a hunger
as I? My stomach remains empty, and I must tie myself up if I am not to
die of hunger.’

At this Dummling was glad, and said: ‘Get up and come with me; you shall
eat yourself full.’ He led him to the king’s palace where all the
flour in the whole Kingdom was collected, and from it he caused a huge
mountain of bread to be baked. The man from the forest stood before it,
began to eat, and by the end of one day the whole mountain had vanished.
Then Dummling for the third time asked for his bride; but the king again
sought a way out, and ordered a ship which could sail on land and on
water. ‘As soon as you come sailing back in it,’ said he, ‘you shall
have my daughter for wife.’

Dummling went straight into the forest, and there sat the little grey
man to whom he had given his cake. When he heard what Dummling wanted,
he said: ‘Since you have given me to eat and to drink, I will give you
the ship; and I do all this because you once were kind to me.’ Then he
gave him the ship which could sail on land and water, and when the king
saw that, he could no longer prevent him from having his daughter. The
wedding was celebrated, and after the king’s death, Dummling inherited
his kingdom and lived for a long time contentedly with his wife.

     [*] Simpleton




THE WATER OF LIFE

Long before you or I were born, there reigned, in a country a great way
off, a king who had three sons. This king once fell very ill--so ill
that nobody thought he could live. His sons were very much grieved
at their father’s sickness; and as they were walking together very
mournfully in the garden of the palace, a little old man met them and
asked what was the matter. They told him that their father was very ill,
and that they were afraid nothing could save him. ‘I know what would,’
said the little old man; ‘it is the Water of Life. If he could have a
draught of it he would be well again; but it is very hard to get.’ Then
the eldest son said, ‘I will soon find it’: and he went to the sick
king, and begged that he might go in search of the Water of Life, as
it was the only thing that could save him. ‘No,’ said the king. ‘I had
rather die than place you in such great danger as you must meet with in
your journey.’ But he begged so hard that the king let him go; and the
prince thought to himself, ‘If I bring my father this water, he will
make me sole heir to his kingdom.’

Then he set out: and when he had gone on his way some time he came to a
deep valley, overhung with rocks and woods; and as he looked around, he
saw standing above him on one of the rocks a little ugly dwarf, with a
sugarloaf cap and a scarlet cloak; and the dwarf called to him and said,
‘Prince, whither so fast?’ ‘What is that to thee, you ugly imp?’ said
the prince haughtily, and rode on.

But the dwarf was enraged at his behaviour, and laid a fairy spell
of ill-luck upon him; so that as he rode on the mountain pass became
narrower and narrower, and at last the way was so straitened that he
could not go to step forward: and when he thought to have turned his
horse round and go back the way he came, he heard a loud laugh ringing
round him, and found that the path was closed behind him, so that he was
shut in all round. He next tried to get off his horse and make his way
on foot, but again the laugh rang in his ears, and he found himself
unable to move a step, and thus he was forced to abide spellbound.

Meantime the old king was lingering on in daily hope of his son’s
return, till at last the second son said, ‘Father, I will go in search
of the Water of Life.’ For he thought to himself, ‘My brother is surely
dead, and the kingdom will fall to me if I find the water.’ The king was
at first very unwilling to let him go, but at last yielded to his wish.
So he set out and followed the same road which his brother had done,
and met with the same elf, who stopped him at the same spot in the
mountains, saying, as before, ‘Prince, prince, whither so fast?’ ‘Mind
your own affairs, busybody!’ said the prince scornfully, and rode on.

But the dwarf put the same spell upon him as he put on his elder
brother, and he, too, was at last obliged to take up his abode in the
heart of the mountains. Thus it is with proud silly people, who think
themselves above everyone else, and are too proud to ask or take advice.

When the second prince had thus been gone a long time, the youngest son
said he would go and search for the Water of Life, and trusted he should
soon be able to make his father well again. So he set out, and the dwarf
met him too at the same spot in the valley, among the mountains, and
said, ‘Prince, whither so fast?’ And the prince said, ‘I am going in
search of the Water of Life, because my father is ill, and like to die:
can you help me? Pray be kind, and aid me if you can!’ ‘Do you know
where it is to be found?’ asked the dwarf. ‘No,’ said the prince, ‘I do
not. Pray tell me if you know.’ ‘Then as you have spoken to me kindly,
and are wise enough to seek for advice, I will tell you how and where to
go. The water you seek springs from a well in an enchanted castle; and,
that you may be able to reach it in safety, I will give you an iron wand
and two little loaves of bread; strike the iron door of the castle three
times with the wand, and it will open: two hungry lions will be lying
down inside gaping for their prey, but if you throw them the bread they
will let you pass; then hasten on to the well, and take some of the
Water of Life before the clock strikes twelve; for if you tarry longer
the door will shut upon you for ever.’

Then the prince thanked his little friend with the scarlet cloak for his
friendly aid, and took the wand and the bread, and went travelling on
and on, over sea and over land, till he came to his journey’s end, and
found everything to be as the dwarf had told him. The door flew open at
the third stroke of the wand, and when the lions were quieted he went on
through the castle and came at length to a beautiful hall. Around it he
saw several knights sitting in a trance; then he pulled off their rings
and put them on his own fingers. In another room he saw on a table a
sword and a loaf of bread, which he also took. Further on he came to a
room where a beautiful young lady sat upon a couch; and she welcomed him
joyfully, and said, if he would set her free from the spell that bound
her, the kingdom should be his, if he would come back in a year and
marry her. Then she told him that the well that held the Water of Life
was in the palace gardens; and bade him make haste, and draw what he
wanted before the clock struck twelve.

He walked on; and as he walked through beautiful gardens he came to a
delightful shady spot in which stood a couch; and he thought to himself,
as he felt tired, that he would rest himself for a while, and gaze on
the lovely scenes around him. So he laid himself down, and sleep
fell upon him unawares, so that he did not wake up till the clock was
striking a quarter to twelve. Then he sprang from the couch dreadfully
frightened, ran to the well, filled a cup that was standing by him full
of water, and hastened to get away in time. Just as he was going out of
the iron door it struck twelve, and the door fell so quickly upon him
that it snapped off a piece of his heel.

When he found himself safe, he was overjoyed to think that he had got
the Water of Life; and as he was going on his way homewards, he passed
by the little dwarf, who, when he saw the sword and the loaf, said, ‘You
have made a noble prize; with the sword you can at a blow slay whole
armies, and the bread will never fail you.’ Then the prince thought
to himself, ‘I cannot go home to my father without my brothers’; so he
said, ‘My dear friend, cannot you tell me where my two brothers are, who
set out in search of the Water of Life before me, and never came back?’
‘I have shut them up by a charm between two mountains,’ said the dwarf,
‘because they were proud and ill-behaved, and scorned to ask advice.’
The prince begged so hard for his brothers, that the dwarf at last set
them free, though unwillingly, saying, ‘Beware of them, for they have
bad hearts.’ Their brother, however, was greatly rejoiced to see them,
and told them all that had happened to him; how he had found the Water
of Life, and had taken a cup full of it; and how he had set a beautiful
princess free from a spell that bound her; and how she had engaged to
wait a whole year, and then to marry him, and to give him the kingdom.

Then they all three rode on together, and on their way home came to a
country that was laid waste by war and a dreadful famine, so that it was
feared all must die for want. But the prince gave the king of the land
the bread, and all his kingdom ate of it. And he lent the king the
wonderful sword, and he slew the enemy’s army with it; and thus the
kingdom was once more in peace and plenty. In the same manner he
befriended two other countries through which they passed on their way.

When they came to the sea, they got into a ship and during their voyage
the two eldest said to themselves, ‘Our brother has got the water which
we could not find, therefore our father will forsake us and give him the
kingdom, which is our right’; so they were full of envy and revenge, and
agreed together how they could ruin him. Then they waited till he was
fast asleep, and poured the Water of Life out of the cup, and took it
for themselves, giving him bitter sea-water instead.

When they came to their journey’s end, the youngest son brought his cup
to the sick king, that he might drink and be healed. Scarcely, however,
had he tasted the bitter sea-water when he became worse even than he was
before; and then both the elder sons came in, and blamed the youngest
for what they had done; and said that he wanted to poison their father,
but that they had found the Water of Life, and had brought it with them.
He no sooner began to drink of what they brought him, than he felt his
sickness leave him, and was as strong and well as in his younger days.
Then they went to their brother, and laughed at him, and said, ‘Well,
brother, you found the Water of Life, did you? You have had the trouble
and we shall have the reward. Pray, with all your cleverness, why did
not you manage to keep your eyes open? Next year one of us will take
away your beautiful princess, if you do not take care. You had better
say nothing about this to our father, for he does not believe a word you
say; and if you tell tales, you shall lose your life into the bargain:
but be quiet, and we will let you off.’

The old king was still very angry with his youngest son, and thought
that he really meant to have taken away his life; so he called his court
together, and asked what should be done, and all agreed that he ought to
be put to death. The prince knew nothing of what was going on, till one
day, when the king’s chief huntsmen went a-hunting with him, and they
were alone in the wood together, the huntsman looked so sorrowful that
the prince said, ‘My friend, what is the matter with you?’ ‘I cannot and
dare not tell you,’ said he. But the prince begged very hard, and said,
‘Only tell me what it is, and do not think I shall be angry, for I will
forgive you.’ ‘Alas!’ said the huntsman; ‘the king has ordered me to
shoot you.’ The prince started at this, and said, ‘Let me live, and I
will change dresses with you; you shall take my royal coat to show to my
father, and do you give me your shabby one.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said
the huntsman; ‘I am sure I shall be glad to save you, for I could not
have shot you.’ Then he took the prince’s coat, and gave him the shabby
one, and went away through the wood.

Some time after, three grand embassies came to the old king’s court,
with rich gifts of gold and precious stones for his youngest son; now
all these were sent from the three kings to whom he had lent his sword
and loaf of bread, in order to rid them of their enemy and feed their
people. This touched the old king’s heart, and he thought his son might
still be guiltless, and said to his court, ‘O that my son were still
alive! how it grieves me that I had him killed!’ ‘He is still alive,’
said the huntsman; ‘and I am glad that I had pity on him, but let him
go in peace, and brought home his royal coat.’ At this the king was
overwhelmed with joy, and made it known throughout all his kingdom, that
if his son would come back to his court he would forgive him.

Meanwhile the princess was eagerly waiting till her deliverer should
come back; and had a road made leading up to her palace all of shining
gold; and told her courtiers that whoever came on horseback, and rode
straight up to the gate upon it, was her true lover; and that they must
let him in: but whoever rode on one side of it, they must be sure was
not the right one; and that they must send him away at once.

The time soon came, when the eldest brother thought that he would make
haste to go to the princess, and say that he was the one who had set
her free, and that he should have her for his wife, and the kingdom with
her. As he came before the palace and saw the golden road, he stopped to
look at it, and he thought to himself, ‘It is a pity to ride upon this
beautiful road’; so he turned aside and rode on the right-hand side of
it. But when he came to the gate, the guards, who had seen the road
he took, said to him, he could not be what he said he was, and must go
about his business.

The second prince set out soon afterwards on the same errand; and when
he came to the golden road, and his horse had set one foot upon it,
he stopped to look at it, and thought it very beautiful, and said to
himself, ‘What a pity it is that anything should tread here!’ Then he
too turned aside and rode on the left side of it. But when he came to
the gate the guards said he was not the true prince, and that he too
must go away about his business; and away he went.

Now when the full year was come round, the third brother left the forest
in which he had lain hid for fear of his father’s anger, and set out in
search of his betrothed bride. So he journeyed on, thinking of her all
the way, and rode so quickly that he did not even see what the road was
made of, but went with his horse straight over it; and as he came to the
gate it flew open, and the princess welcomed him with joy, and said
he was her deliverer, and should now be her husband and lord of the
kingdom. When the first joy at their meeting was over, the princess told
him she had heard of his father having forgiven him, and of his wish to
have him home again: so, before his wedding with the princess, he went
to visit his father, taking her with him. Then he told him everything;
how his brothers had cheated and robbed him, and yet that he had borne
all those wrongs for the love of his father. And the old king was very
angry, and wanted to punish his wicked sons; but they made their escape,
and got into a ship and sailed away over the wide sea, and where they
went to nobody knew and nobody cared.

And now the old king gathered together his court, and asked all his
kingdom to come and celebrate the wedding of his son and the princess.
And young and old, noble and squire, gentle and simple, came at once
on the summons; and among the rest came the friendly dwarf, with the
sugarloaf hat, and a new scarlet cloak.

  And the wedding was held, and the merry bells run.
  And all the good people they danced and they sung,
  And feasted and frolick’d I can’t tell how long.




THE TWELVE HUNTSMEN

There was once a king’s son who had a bride whom he loved very much. And
when he was sitting beside her and very happy, news came that his father
lay sick unto death, and desired to see him once again before his end.
Then he said to his beloved: ‘I must now go and leave you, I give you
a ring as a remembrance of me. When I am king, I will return and fetch
you.’ So he rode away, and when he reached his father, the latter was
dangerously ill, and near his death. He said to him: ‘Dear son, I wished
to see you once again before my end, promise me to marry as I wish,’ and
he named a certain king’s daughter who was to be his wife. The son was
in such trouble that he did not think what he was doing, and said: ‘Yes,
dear father, your will shall be done,’ and thereupon the king shut his
eyes, and died.

When therefore the son had been proclaimed king, and the time of
mourning was over, he was forced to keep the promise which he had given
his father, and caused the king’s daughter to be asked in marriage, and
she was promised to him. His first betrothed heard of this, and fretted
so much about his faithfulness that she nearly died. Then her father
said to her: ‘Dearest child, why are you so sad? You shall have
whatsoever you will.’ She thought for a moment and said: ‘Dear father,
I wish for eleven girls exactly like myself in face, figure, and size.’
The father said: ‘If it be possible, your desire shall be fulfilled,’
and he caused a search to be made in his whole kingdom, until eleven
young maidens were found who exactly resembled his daughter in face,
figure, and size.

When they came to the king’s daughter, she had twelve suits of
huntsmen’s clothes made, all alike, and the eleven maidens had to put
on the huntsmen’s clothes, and she herself put on the twelfth suit.
Thereupon she took her leave of her father, and rode away with them,
and rode to the court of her former betrothed, whom she loved so dearly.
Then she asked if he required any huntsmen, and if he would take all of
them into his service. The king looked at her and did not know her, but
as they were such handsome fellows, he said: ‘Yes,’ and that he would
willingly take them, and now they were the king’s twelve huntsmen.

The king, however, had a lion which was a wondrous animal, for he knew
all concealed and secret things. It came to pass that one evening he
said to the king: ‘You think you have twelve huntsmen?’ ‘Yes,’ said the
king, ‘they are twelve huntsmen.’ The lion continued: ‘You are mistaken,
they are twelve girls.’ The king said: ‘That cannot be true! How
will you prove that to me?’ ‘Oh, just let some peas be strewn in the
ante-chamber,’ answered the lion, ‘and then you will soon see. Men have
a firm step, and when they walk over peas none of them stir, but girls
trip and skip, and drag their feet, and the peas roll about.’ The king
was well pleased with the counsel, and caused the peas to be strewn.

There was, however, a servant of the king’s who favoured the huntsmen,
and when he heard that they were going to be put to this test he went to
them and repeated everything, and said: ‘The lion wants to make the king
believe that you are girls.’ Then the king’s daughter thanked him, and
said to her maidens: ‘Show some strength, and step firmly on the peas.’
So next morning when the king had the twelve huntsmen called before
him, and they came into the ante-chamber where the peas were lying, they
stepped so firmly on them, and had such a strong, sure walk, that not
one of the peas either rolled or stirred. Then they went away again,
and the king said to the lion: ‘You have lied to me, they walk just like
men.’ The lion said: ‘They have been informed that they were going to
be put to the test, and have assumed some strength. Just let twelve
spinning-wheels be brought into the ante-chamber, and they will go to
them and be pleased with them, and that is what no man would do.’
The king liked the advice, and had the spinning-wheels placed in the
ante-chamber.

But the servant, who was well disposed to the huntsmen, went to them,
and disclosed the project. So when they were alone the king’s daughter
said to her eleven girls: ‘Show some constraint, and do not look round
at the spinning-wheels.’ And next morning when the king had his twelve
huntsmen summoned, they went through the ante-chamber, and never once
looked at the spinning-wheels. Then the king again said to the lion:
‘You have deceived me, they are men, for they have not looked at the
spinning-wheels.’ The lion replied: ‘They have restrained themselves.’
The king, however, would no longer believe the lion.

The twelve huntsmen always followed the king to the chase, and his
liking for them continually increased. Now it came to pass that
once when they were out hunting, news came that the king’s bride was
approaching. When the true bride heard that, it hurt her so much that
her heart was almost broken, and she fell fainting to the ground. The
king thought something had happened to his dear huntsman, ran up to him,
wanted to help him, and drew his glove off. Then he saw the ring which
he had given to his first bride, and when he looked in her face he
recognized her. Then his heart was so touched that he kissed her, and
when she opened her eyes he said: ‘You are mine, and I am yours, and
no one in the world can alter that.’ He sent a messenger to the other
bride, and entreated her to return to her own kingdom, for he had a wife
already, and someone who had just found an old key did not require a new
one. Thereupon the wedding was celebrated, and the lion was again taken
into favour, because, after all, he had told the truth.




THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN

There was once a merchant who had only one child, a son, that was very
young, and barely able to run alone. He had two richly laden ships then
making a voyage upon the seas, in which he had embarked all his wealth,
in the hope of making great gains, when the news came that both were
lost. Thus from being a rich man he became all at once so very poor that
nothing was left to him but one small plot of land; and there he often
went in an evening to take his walk, and ease his mind of a little of
his trouble.

One day, as he was roaming along in a brown study, thinking with no
great comfort on what he had been and what he now was, and was like
to be, all on a sudden there stood before him a little, rough-looking,
black dwarf. ‘Prithee, friend, why so sorrowful?’ said he to the
merchant; ‘what is it you take so deeply to heart?’ ‘If you would do me
any good I would willingly tell you,’ said the merchant. ‘Who knows but
I may?’ said the little man: ‘tell me what ails you, and perhaps you
will find I may be of some use.’ Then the merchant told him how all his
wealth was gone to the bottom of the sea, and how he had nothing left
but that little plot of land. ‘Oh, trouble not yourself about that,’
said the dwarf; ‘only undertake to bring me here, twelve years hence,
whatever meets you first on your going home, and I will give you as much
as you please.’ The merchant thought this was no great thing to ask;
that it would most likely be his dog or his cat, or something of that
sort, but forgot his little boy Heinel; so he agreed to the bargain, and
signed and sealed the bond to do what was asked of him.

But as he drew near home, his little boy was so glad to see him that he
crept behind him, and laid fast hold of his legs, and looked up in
his face and laughed. Then the father started, trembling with fear and
horror, and saw what it was that he had bound himself to do; but as no
gold was come, he made himself easy by thinking that it was only a joke
that the dwarf was playing him, and that, at any rate, when the money
came, he should see the bearer, and would not take it in.

About a month afterwards he went upstairs into a lumber-room to look
for some old iron, that he might sell it and raise a little money; and
there, instead of his iron, he saw a large pile of gold lying on the
floor. At the sight of this he was overjoyed, and forgetting all about
his son, went into trade again, and became a richer merchant than
before.

Meantime little Heinel grew up, and as the end of the twelve years drew
near the merchant began to call to mind his bond, and became very sad
and thoughtful; so that care and sorrow were written upon his face. The
boy one day asked what was the matter, but his father would not tell for
some time; at last, however, he said that he had, without knowing it,
sold him for gold to a little, ugly-looking, black dwarf, and that the
twelve years were coming round when he must keep his word. Then Heinel
said, ‘Father, give yourself very little trouble about that; I shall be
too much for the little man.’

When the time came, the father and son went out together to the place
agreed upon: and the son drew a circle on the ground, and set himself
and his father in the middle of it. The little black dwarf soon came,
and walked round and round about the circle, but could not find any way
to get into it, and he either could not, or dared not, jump over it. At
last the boy said to him. ‘Have you anything to say to us, my friend, or
what do you want?’ Now Heinel had found a friend in a good fairy, that
was fond of him, and had told him what to do; for this fairy knew what
good luck was in store for him. ‘Have you brought me what you said you
would?’ said the dwarf to the merchant. The old man held his tongue, but
Heinel said again, ‘What do you want here?’ The dwarf said, ‘I come to
talk with your father, not with you.’ ‘You have cheated and taken in my
father,’ said the son; ‘pray give him up his bond at once.’ ‘Fair and
softly,’ said the little old man; ‘right is right; I have paid my money,
and your father has had it, and spent it; so be so good as to let me
have what I paid it for.’ ‘You must have my consent to that first,’ said
Heinel, ‘so please to step in here, and let us talk it over.’ The old
man grinned, and showed his teeth, as if he should have been very glad
to get into the circle if he could. Then at last, after a long talk,
they came to terms. Heinel agreed that his father must give him up, and
that so far the dwarf should have his way: but, on the other hand, the
fairy had told Heinel what fortune was in store for him, if he followed
his own course; and he did not choose to be given up to his hump-backed
friend, who seemed so anxious for his company.

So, to make a sort of drawn battle of the matter, it was settled that
Heinel should be put into an open boat, that lay on the sea-shore hard
by; that the father should push him off with his own hand, and that he
should thus be set adrift, and left to the bad or good luck of wind and
weather. Then he took leave of his father, and set himself in the boat,
but before it got far off a wave struck it, and it fell with one side
low in the water, so the merchant thought that poor Heinel was lost, and
went home very sorrowful, while the dwarf went his way, thinking that at
any rate he had had his revenge.

The boat, however, did not sink, for the good fairy took care of her
friend, and soon raised the boat up again, and it went safely on. The
young man sat safe within, till at length it ran ashore upon an unknown
land. As he jumped upon the shore he saw before him a beautiful castle
but empty and dreary within, for it was enchanted. ‘Here,’ said he to
himself, ‘must I find the prize the good fairy told me of.’ So he once
more searched the whole palace through, till at last he found a white
snake, lying coiled up on a cushion in one of the chambers.

Now the white snake was an enchanted princess; and she was very glad
to see him, and said, ‘Are you at last come to set me free? Twelve
long years have I waited here for the fairy to bring you hither as she
promised, for you alone can save me. This night twelve men will come:
their faces will be black, and they will be dressed in chain armour.
They will ask what you do here, but give no answer; and let them do
what they will--beat, whip, pinch, prick, or torment you--bear all; only
speak not a word, and at twelve o’clock they must go away. The second
night twelve others will come: and the third night twenty-four, who
will even cut off your head; but at the twelfth hour of that night their
power is gone, and I shall be free, and will come and bring you the
Water of Life, and will wash you with it, and bring you back to life
and health.’ And all came to pass as she had said; Heinel bore all, and
spoke not a word; and the third night the princess came, and fell on his
neck and kissed him. Joy and gladness burst forth throughout the castle,
the wedding was celebrated, and he was crowned king of the Golden
Mountain.

They lived together very happily, and the queen had a son. And thus
eight years had passed over their heads, when the king thought of his
father; and he began to long to see him once again. But the queen was
against his going, and said, ‘I know well that misfortunes will come
upon us if you go.’ However, he gave her no rest till she agreed. At his
going away she gave him a wishing-ring, and said, ‘Take this ring, and
put it on your finger; whatever you wish it will bring you; only promise
never to make use of it to bring me hence to your father’s house.’ Then
he said he would do what she asked, and put the ring on his finger, and
wished himself near the town where his father lived.

Heinel found himself at the gates in a moment; but the guards would
not let him go in, because he was so strangely clad. So he went up to a
neighbouring hill, where a shepherd dwelt, and borrowed his old frock,
and thus passed unknown into the town. When he came to his father’s
house, he said he was his son; but the merchant would not believe him,
and said he had had but one son, his poor Heinel, who he knew was long
since dead: and as he was only dressed like a poor shepherd, he would
not even give him anything to eat. The king, however, still vowed that
he was his son, and said, ‘Is there no mark by which you would know me
if I am really your son?’ ‘Yes,’ said his mother, ‘our Heinel had a mark
like a raspberry on his right arm.’ Then he showed them the mark, and
they knew that what he had said was true.

He next told them how he was king of the Golden Mountain, and was
married to a princess, and had a son seven years old. But the merchant
said, ‘that can never be true; he must be a fine king truly who travels
about in a shepherd’s frock!’ At this the son was vexed; and forgetting
his word, turned his ring, and wished for his queen and son. In an
instant they stood before him; but the queen wept, and said he had
broken his word, and bad luck would follow. He did all he could to
soothe her, and she at last seemed to be appeased; but she was not so in
truth, and was only thinking how she should punish him.

One day he took her to walk with him out of the town, and showed her
the spot where the boat was set adrift upon the wide waters. Then he sat
himself down, and said, ‘I am very much tired; sit by me, I will rest my
head in your lap, and sleep a while.’ As soon as he had fallen asleep,
however, she drew the ring from his finger, and crept softly away, and
wished herself and her son at home in their kingdom. And when he awoke
he found himself alone, and saw that the ring was gone from his finger.
‘I can never go back to my father’s house,’ said he; ‘they would say I
am a sorcerer: I will journey forth into the world, till I come again to
my kingdom.’

So saying he set out and travelled till he came to a hill, where three
giants were sharing their father’s goods; and as they saw him pass they
cried out and said, ‘Little men have sharp wits; he shall part the goods
between us.’ Now there was a sword that cut off an enemy’s head whenever
the wearer gave the words, ‘Heads off!’; a cloak that made the owner
invisible, or gave him any form he pleased; and a pair of boots that
carried the wearer wherever he wished. Heinel said they must first let
him try these wonderful things, then he might know how to set a value
upon them. Then they gave him the cloak, and he wished himself a fly,
and in a moment he was a fly. ‘The cloak is very well,’ said he: ‘now
give me the sword.’ ‘No,’ said they; ‘not unless you undertake not to
say, “Heads off!” for if you do we are all dead men.’ So they gave it
him, charging him to try it on a tree. He next asked for the boots also;
and the moment he had all three in his power, he wished himself at
the Golden Mountain; and there he was at once. So the giants were left
behind with no goods to share or quarrel about.

As Heinel came near his castle he heard the sound of merry music; and
the people around told him that his queen was about to marry another
husband. Then he threw his cloak around him, and passed through the
castle hall, and placed himself by the side of the queen, where no one
saw him. But when anything to eat was put upon her plate, he took it
away and ate it himself; and when a glass of wine was handed to her, he
took it and drank it; and thus, though they kept on giving her meat and
drink, her plate and cup were always empty.

Upon this, fear and remorse came over her, and she went into her chamber
alone, and sat there weeping; and he followed her there. ‘Alas!’ said
she to herself, ‘was I not once set free? Why then does this enchantment
still seem to bind me?’

‘False and fickle one!’ said he. ‘One indeed came who set thee free, and
he is now near thee again; but how have you used him? Ought he to
have had such treatment from thee?’ Then he went out and sent away the
company, and said the wedding was at an end, for that he was come back
to the kingdom. But the princes, peers, and great men mocked at him.
However, he would enter into no parley with them, but only asked them
if they would go in peace or not. Then they turned upon him and tried
to seize him; but he drew his sword. ‘Heads Off!’ cried he; and with the
word the traitors’ heads fell before him, and Heinel was once more king
of the Golden Mountain.




DOCTOR KNOWALL

There was once upon a time a poor peasant called Crabb, who drove with
two oxen a load of wood to the town, and sold it to a doctor for two
talers. When the money was being counted out to him, it so happened that
the doctor was sitting at table, and when the peasant saw how well he
ate and drank, his heart desired what he saw, and would willingly
have been a doctor too. So he remained standing a while, and at length
inquired if he too could not be a doctor. ‘Oh, yes,’ said the doctor,
‘that is soon managed.’ ‘What must I do?’ asked the peasant. ‘In the
first place buy yourself an A B C book of the kind which has a cock on
the frontispiece; in the second, turn your cart and your two oxen into
money, and get yourself some clothes, and whatsoever else pertains to
medicine; thirdly, have a sign painted for yourself with the words: “I
am Doctor Knowall,” and have that nailed up above your house-door.’ The
peasant did everything that he had been told to do. When he had doctored
people awhile, but not long, a rich and great lord had some money
stolen. Then he was told about Doctor Knowall who lived in such and such
a village, and must know what had become of the money. So the lord had
the horses harnessed to his carriage, drove out to the village, and
asked Crabb if he were Doctor Knowall. Yes, he was, he said. Then he was
to go with him and bring back the stolen money. ‘Oh, yes, but Grete, my
wife, must go too.’ The lord was willing, and let both of them have a
seat in the carriage, and they all drove away together. When they came
to the nobleman’s castle, the table was spread, and Crabb was told to
sit down and eat. ‘Yes, but my wife, Grete, too,’ said he, and he seated
himself with her at the table. And when the first servant came with a
dish of delicate fare, the peasant nudged his wife, and said: ‘Grete,
that was the first,’ meaning that was the servant who brought the first
dish. The servant, however, thought he intended by that to say: ‘That is
the first thief,’ and as he actually was so, he was terrified, and said
to his comrade outside: ‘The doctor knows all: we shall fare ill, he
said I was the first.’ The second did not want to go in at all, but was
forced. So when he went in with his dish, the peasant nudged his wife,
and said: ‘Grete, that is the second.’ This servant was equally alarmed,
and he got out as fast as he could. The third fared no better, for the
peasant again said: ‘Grete, that is the third.’ The fourth had to carry
in a dish that was covered, and the lord told the doctor that he was to
show his skill, and guess what was beneath the cover. Actually, there
were crabs. The doctor looked at the dish, had no idea what to say, and
cried: ‘Ah, poor Crabb.’ When the lord heard that, he cried: ‘There! he
knows it; he must also know who has the money!’

On this the servants looked terribly uneasy, and made a sign to the
doctor that they wished him to step outside for a moment. When therefore
he went out, all four of them confessed to him that they had stolen
the money, and said that they would willingly restore it and give him a
heavy sum into the bargain, if he would not denounce them, for if he
did they would be hanged. They led him to the spot where the money was
concealed. With this the doctor was satisfied, and returned to the hall,
sat down to the table, and said: ‘My lord, now will I search in my book
where the gold is hidden.’ The fifth servant, however, crept into the
stove to hear if the doctor knew still more. But the doctor sat still
and opened his A B C book, turned the pages backwards and forwards, and
looked for the cock. As he could not find it immediately he said: ‘I
know you are there, so you had better come out!’ Then the fellow in the
stove thought that the doctor meant him, and full of terror, sprang out,
crying: ‘That man knows everything!’ Then Doctor Knowall showed the lord
where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it, and received
from both sides much money in reward, and became a renowned man.




THE SEVEN RAVENS

There was once a man who had seven sons, and last of all one daughter.
Although the little girl was very pretty, she was so weak and small that
they thought she could not live; but they said she should at once be
christened.

So the father sent one of his sons in haste to the spring to get some
water, but the other six ran with him. Each wanted to be first at
drawing the water, and so they were in such a hurry that all let their
pitchers fall into the well, and they stood very foolishly looking at
one another, and did not know what to do, for none dared go home. In the
meantime the father was uneasy, and could not tell what made the
young men stay so long. ‘Surely,’ said he, ‘the whole seven must have
forgotten themselves over some game of play’; and when he had waited
still longer and they yet did not come, he flew into a rage and wished
them all turned into ravens. Scarcely had he spoken these words when he
heard a croaking over his head, and looked up and saw seven ravens as
black as coal flying round and round. Sorry as he was to see his wish
so fulfilled, he did not know how what was done could be undone, and
comforted himself as well as he could for the loss of his seven sons
with his dear little daughter, who soon became stronger and every day
more beautiful.

For a long time she did not know that she had ever had any brothers; for
her father and mother took care not to speak of them before her: but one
day by chance she heard the people about her speak of them. ‘Yes,’ said
they, ‘she is beautiful indeed, but still ‘tis a pity that her brothers
should have been lost for her sake.’ Then she was much grieved, and went
to her father and mother, and asked if she had any brothers, and what
had become of them. So they dared no longer hide the truth from her, but
said it was the will of Heaven, and that her birth was only the innocent
cause of it; but the little girl mourned sadly about it every day, and
thought herself bound to do all she could to bring her brothers back;
and she had neither rest nor ease, till at length one day she stole
away, and set out into the wide world to find her brothers, wherever
they might be, and free them, whatever it might cost her.

She took nothing with her but a little ring which her father and mother
had given her, a loaf of bread in case she should be hungry, a little
pitcher of water in case she should be thirsty, and a little stool
to rest upon when she should be weary. Thus she went on and on, and
journeyed till she came to the world’s end; then she came to the sun,
but the sun looked much too hot and fiery; so she ran away quickly to
the moon, but the moon was cold and chilly, and said, ‘I smell flesh
and blood this way!’ so she took herself away in a hurry and came to the
stars, and the stars were friendly and kind to her, and each star sat
upon his own little stool; but the morning star rose up and gave her a
little piece of wood, and said, ‘If you have not this little piece of
wood, you cannot unlock the castle that stands on the glass-mountain,
and there your brothers live.’ The little girl took the piece of wood,
rolled it up in a little cloth, and went on again until she came to the
glass-mountain, and found the door shut. Then she felt for the little
piece of wood; but when she unwrapped the cloth it was not there, and
she saw she had lost the gift of the good stars. What was to be done?
She wanted to save her brothers, and had no key of the castle of the
glass-mountain; so this faithful little sister took a knife out of her
pocket and cut off her little finger, that was just the size of the
piece of wood she had lost, and put it in the door and opened it.

As she went in, a little dwarf came up to her, and said, ‘What are you
seeking for?’ ‘I seek for my brothers, the seven ravens,’ answered she.
Then the dwarf said, ‘My masters are not at home; but if you will wait
till they come, pray step in.’ Now the little dwarf was getting their
dinner ready, and he brought their food upon seven little plates, and
their drink in seven little glasses, and set them upon the table, and
out of each little plate their sister ate a small piece, and out of each
little glass she drank a small drop; but she let the ring that she had
brought with her fall into the last glass.

On a sudden she heard a fluttering and croaking in the air, and the
dwarf said, ‘Here come my masters.’ When they came in, they wanted to
eat and drink, and looked for their little plates and glasses. Then said
one after the other,

‘Who has eaten from my little plate? And who has been drinking out of my
little glass?’

 ‘Caw! Caw! well I ween
  Mortal lips have this way been.’

When the seventh came to the bottom of his glass, and found there the
ring, he looked at it, and knew that it was his father’s and mother’s,
and said, ‘O that our little sister would but come! then we should be
free.’ When the little girl heard this (for she stood behind the door
all the time and listened), she ran forward, and in an instant all
the ravens took their right form again; and all hugged and kissed each
other, and went merrily home.




THE WEDDING OF MRS FOX


FIRST STORY

There was once upon a time an old fox with nine tails, who believed that
his wife was not faithful to him, and wished to put her to the test. He
stretched himself out under the bench, did not move a limb, and behaved
as if he were stone dead. Mrs Fox went up to her room, shut herself in,
and her maid, Miss Cat, sat by the fire, and did the cooking. When it
became known that the old fox was dead, suitors presented themselves.
The maid heard someone standing at the house-door, knocking. She went
and opened it, and it was a young fox, who said:

 ‘What may you be about, Miss Cat?
  Do you sleep or do you wake?’

She answered:

 ‘I am not sleeping, I am waking,
  Would you know what I am making?
  I am boiling warm beer with butter,
  Will you be my guest for supper?’

‘No, thank you, miss,’ said the fox, ‘what is Mrs Fox doing?’ The maid
replied:

 ‘She is sitting in her room,
  Moaning in her gloom,
  Weeping her little eyes quite red,
  Because old Mr Fox is dead.’

‘Do just tell her, miss, that a young fox is here, who would like to woo
her.’ ‘Certainly, young sir.’

  The cat goes up the stairs trip, trap,
  The door she knocks at tap, tap, tap,
 ‘Mistress Fox, are you inside?’
 ‘Oh, yes, my little cat,’ she cried.
 ‘A wooer he stands at the door out there.’
 ‘What does he look like, my dear?’

‘Has he nine as beautiful tails as the late Mr Fox?’ ‘Oh, no,’ answered
the cat, ‘he has only one.’ ‘Then I will not have him.’

Miss Cat went downstairs and sent the wooer away. Soon afterwards there
was another knock, and another fox was at the door who wished to woo Mrs
Fox. He had two tails, but he did not fare better than the first. After
this still more came, each with one tail more than the other, but they
were all turned away, until at last one came who had nine tails, like
old Mr Fox. When the widow heard that, she said joyfully to the cat:

 ‘Now open the gates and doors all wide,
  And carry old Mr Fox outside.’

But just as the wedding was going to be solemnized, old Mr Fox stirred
under the bench, and cudgelled all the rabble, and drove them and Mrs
Fox out of the house.


SECOND STORY

When old Mr Fox was dead, the wolf came as a suitor, and knocked at the
door, and the cat who was servant to Mrs Fox, opened it for him. The
wolf greeted her, and said:

 ‘Good day, Mrs Cat of Kehrewit,
  How comes it that alone you sit?
  What are you making good?’

The cat replied:

 ‘In milk I’m breaking bread so sweet,
  Will you be my guest, and eat?’

‘No, thank you, Mrs Cat,’ answered the wolf. ‘Is Mrs Fox not at home?’

The cat said:

 ‘She sits upstairs in her room,
  Bewailing her sorrowful doom,
  Bewailing her trouble so sore,
  For old Mr Fox is no more.’

The wolf answered:

 ‘If she’s in want of a husband now,
  Then will it please her to step below?’
  The cat runs quickly up the stair,
  And lets her tail fly here and there,
  Until she comes to the parlour door.
  With her five gold rings at the door she knocks:
 ‘Are you within, good Mistress Fox?
  If you’re in want of a husband now,
  Then will it please you to step below?

Mrs Fox asked: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has he a pointed
mouth?’ ‘No,’ answered the cat. ‘Then he won’t do for me.’

When the wolf was gone, came a dog, a stag, a hare, a bear, a lion, and
all the beasts of the forest, one after the other. But one of the good
qualities which old Mr Fox had possessed, was always lacking, and the
cat had continually to send the suitors away. At length came a young
fox. Then Mrs Fox said: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has a
little pointed mouth?’ ‘Yes,’ said the cat, ‘he has.’ ‘Then let him come
upstairs,’ said Mrs Fox, and ordered the servant to prepare the wedding
feast.

 ‘Sweep me the room as clean as you can,
  Up with the window, fling out my old man!
  For many a fine fat mouse he brought,
  Yet of his wife he never thought,
  But ate up every one he caught.’

Then the wedding was solemnized with young Mr Fox, and there was much
rejoicing and dancing; and if they have not left off, they are dancing
still.




THE SALAD

As a merry young huntsman was once going briskly along through a wood,
there came up a little old woman, and said to him, ‘Good day, good day;
you seem merry enough, but I am hungry and thirsty; do pray give me
something to eat.’ The huntsman took pity on her, and put his hand in
his pocket and gave her what he had. Then he wanted to go his way; but
she took hold of him, and said, ‘Listen, my friend, to what I am going
to tell you; I will reward you for your kindness; go your way, and after
a little time you will come to a tree where you will see nine birds
sitting on a cloak. Shoot into the midst of them, and one will fall down
dead: the cloak will fall too; take it, it is a wishing-cloak, and when
you wear it you will find yourself at any place where you may wish to
be. Cut open the dead bird, take out its heart and keep it, and you will
find a piece of gold under your pillow every morning when you rise. It
is the bird’s heart that will bring you this good luck.’

The huntsman thanked her, and thought to himself, ‘If all this does
happen, it will be a fine thing for me.’ When he had gone a hundred
steps or so, he heard a screaming and chirping in the branches over him,
and looked up and saw a flock of birds pulling a cloak with their bills
and feet; screaming, fighting, and tugging at each other as if
each wished to have it himself. ‘Well,’ said the huntsman, ‘this is
wonderful; this happens just as the old woman said’; then he shot into
the midst of them so that their feathers flew all about. Off went the
flock chattering away; but one fell down dead, and the cloak with it.
Then the huntsman did as the old woman told him, cut open the bird, took
out the heart, and carried the cloak home with him.

The next morning when he awoke he lifted up his pillow, and there lay
the piece of gold glittering underneath; the same happened next day, and
indeed every day when he arose. He heaped up a great deal of gold, and
at last thought to himself, ‘Of what use is this gold to me whilst I am
at home? I will go out into the world and look about me.’

Then he took leave of his friends, and hung his bag and bow about his
neck, and went his way. It so happened that his road one day led through
a thick wood, at the end of which was a large castle in a green meadow,
and at one of the windows stood an old woman with a very beautiful young
lady by her side looking about them. Now the old woman was a witch, and
said to the young lady, ‘There is a young man coming out of the wood who
carries a wonderful prize; we must get it away from him, my dear child,
for it is more fit for us than for him. He has a bird’s heart that
brings a piece of gold under his pillow every morning.’ Meantime the
huntsman came nearer and looked at the lady, and said to himself, ‘I
have been travelling so long that I should like to go into this castle
and rest myself, for I have money enough to pay for anything I want’;
but the real reason was, that he wanted to see more of the beautiful
lady. Then he went into the house, and was welcomed kindly; and it was
not long before he was so much in love that he thought of nothing else
but looking at the lady’s eyes, and doing everything that she wished.
Then the old woman said, ‘Now is the time for getting the bird’s heart.’
So the lady stole it away, and he never found any more gold under his
pillow, for it lay now under the young lady’s, and the old woman took it
away every morning; but he was so much in love that he never missed his
prize.

‘Well,’ said the old witch, ‘we have got the bird’s heart, but not the
wishing-cloak yet, and that we must also get.’ ‘Let us leave him that,’
said the young lady; ‘he has already lost his wealth.’ Then the witch
was very angry, and said, ‘Such a cloak is a very rare and wonderful
thing, and I must and will have it.’ So she did as the old woman told
her, and set herself at the window, and looked about the country and
seemed very sorrowful; then the huntsman said, ‘What makes you so sad?’
‘Alas! dear sir,’ said she, ‘yonder lies the granite rock where all the
costly diamonds grow, and I want so much to go there, that whenever I
think of it I cannot help being sorrowful, for who can reach it? only
the birds and the flies--man cannot.’ ‘If that’s all your grief,’ said
the huntsman, ‘I’ll take you there with all my heart’; so he drew her under
his cloak, and the moment he wished to be on the granite mountain they
were both there. The diamonds glittered so on all sides that they were
delighted with the sight and picked up the finest. But the old witch
made a deep sleep come upon him, and he said to the young lady, ‘Let us
sit down and rest ourselves a little, I am so tired that I cannot stand
any longer.’ So they sat down, and he laid his head in her lap and
fell asleep; and whilst he was sleeping on she took the cloak from
his shoulders, hung it on her own, picked up the diamonds, and wished
herself home again.

When he awoke and found that his lady had tricked him, and left him
alone on the wild rock, he said, ‘Alas! what roguery there is in the
world!’ and there he sat in great grief and fear, not knowing what to
do. Now this rock belonged to fierce giants who lived upon it; and as
he saw three of them striding about, he thought to himself, ‘I can only
save myself by feigning to be asleep’; so he laid himself down as if he
were in a sound sleep. When the giants came up to him, the first pushed
him with his foot, and said, ‘What worm is this that lies here curled
up?’ ‘Tread upon him and kill him,’ said the second. ‘It’s not worth the
trouble,’ said the third; ‘let him live, he’ll go climbing higher up the
mountain, and some cloud will come rolling and carry him away.’ And they
passed on. But the huntsman had heard all they said; and as soon as they
were gone, he climbed to the top of the mountain, and when he had sat
there a short time a cloud came rolling around him, and caught him in a
whirlwind and bore him along for some time, till it settled in a garden,
and he fell quite gently to the ground amongst the greens and cabbages.

Then he looked around him, and said, ‘I wish I had something to eat, if
not I shall be worse off than before; for here I see neither apples
nor pears, nor any kind of fruits, nothing but vegetables.’ At last he
thought to himself, ‘I can eat salad, it will refresh and strengthen
me.’ So he picked out a fine head and ate of it; but scarcely had he
swallowed two bites when he felt himself quite changed, and saw with
horror that he was turned into an ass. However, he still felt very
hungry, and the salad tasted very nice; so he ate on till he came
to another kind of salad, and scarcely had he tasted it when he felt
another change come over him, and soon saw that he was lucky enough to
have found his old shape again.

Then he laid himself down and slept off a little of his weariness; and
when he awoke the next morning he broke off a head both of the good and
the bad salad, and thought to himself, ‘This will help me to my fortune
again, and enable me to pay off some folks for their treachery.’ So he
went away to try and find the castle of his friends; and after wandering
about a few days he luckily found it. Then he stained his face all over
brown, so that even his mother would not have known him, and went into
the castle and asked for a lodging; ‘I am so tired,’ said he, ‘that I
can go no farther.’ ‘Countryman,’ said the witch, ‘who are you? and what
is your business?’ ‘I am,’ said he, ‘a messenger sent by the king to
find the finest salad that grows under the sun. I have been lucky
enough to find it, and have brought it with me; but the heat of the sun
scorches so that it begins to wither, and I don’t know that I can carry
it farther.’

When the witch and the young lady heard of his beautiful salad, they
longed to taste it, and said, ‘Dear countryman, let us just taste it.’
‘To be sure,’ answered he; ‘I have two heads of it with me, and will
give you one’; so he opened his bag and gave them the bad. Then the
witch herself took it into the kitchen to be dressed; and when it was
ready she could not wait till it was carried up, but took a few leaves
immediately and put them in her mouth, and scarcely were they swallowed
when she lost her own form and ran braying down into the court in the
form of an ass. Now the servant-maid came into the kitchen, and seeing
the salad ready, was going to carry it up; but on the way she too felt a
wish to taste it as the old woman had done, and ate some leaves; so she
also was turned into an ass and ran after the other, letting the dish
with the salad fall on the ground. The messenger sat all this time with
the beautiful young lady, and as nobody came with the salad and she
longed to taste it, she said, ‘I don’t know where the salad can be.’
Then he thought something must have happened, and said, ‘I will go
into the kitchen and see.’ And as he went he saw two asses in the court
running about, and the salad lying on the ground. ‘All right!’ said
he; ‘those two have had their share.’ Then he took up the rest of
the leaves, laid them on the dish and brought them to the young lady,
saying, ‘I bring you the dish myself that you may not wait any longer.’
So she ate of it, and like the others ran off into the court braying
away.

Then the huntsman washed his face and went into the court that they
might know him. ‘Now you shall be paid for your roguery,’ said he; and
tied them all three to a rope and took them along with him till he
came to a mill and knocked at the window. ‘What’s the matter?’ said the
miller. ‘I have three tiresome beasts here,’ said the other; ‘if you
will take them, give them food and room, and treat them as I tell you,
I will pay you whatever you ask.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said the miller;
‘but how shall I treat them?’ Then the huntsman said, ‘Give the old
one stripes three times a day and hay once; give the next (who was
the servant-maid) stripes once a day and hay three times; and give
the youngest (who was the beautiful lady) hay three times a day and
no stripes’: for he could not find it in his heart to have her beaten.
After this he went back to the castle, where he found everything he
wanted.

Some days after, the miller came to him and told him that the old ass
was dead; ‘The other two,’ said he, ‘are alive and eat, but are so
sorrowful that they cannot last long.’ Then the huntsman pitied them,
and told the miller to drive them back to him, and when they came, he
gave them some of the good salad to eat. And the beautiful young lady
fell upon her knees before him, and said, ‘O dearest huntsman! forgive
me all the ill I have done you; my mother forced me to it, it was
against my will, for I always loved you very much. Your wishing-cloak
hangs up in the closet, and as for the bird’s heart, I will give it you
too.’ But he said, ‘Keep it, it will be just the same thing, for I mean
to make you my wife.’ So they were married, and lived together very
happily till they died.




THE STORY OF THE YOUTH WHO WENT FORTH TO LEARN WHAT FEAR WAS

A certain father had two sons, the elder of who was smart and sensible,
and could do everything, but the younger was stupid and could neither
learn nor understand anything, and when people saw him they said:
‘There’s a fellow who will give his father some trouble!’ When anything
had to be done, it was always the elder who was forced to do it; but
if his father bade him fetch anything when it was late, or in the
night-time, and the way led through the churchyard, or any other dismal
place, he answered: ‘Oh, no father, I’ll not go there, it makes me
shudder!’ for he was afraid. Or when stories were told by the fire at
night which made the flesh creep, the listeners sometimes said: ‘Oh,
it makes us shudder!’ The younger sat in a corner and listened with
the rest of them, and could not imagine what they could mean. ‘They are
always saying: “It makes me shudder, it makes me shudder!” It does not
make me shudder,’ thought he. ‘That, too, must be an art of which I
understand nothing!’

Now it came to pass that his father said to him one day: ‘Hearken to me,
you fellow in the corner there, you are growing tall and strong, and you
too must learn something by which you can earn your bread. Look how your
brother works, but you do not even earn your salt.’ ‘Well, father,’ he
replied, ‘I am quite willing to learn something--indeed, if it could but
be managed, I should like to learn how to shudder. I don’t understand
that at all yet.’ The elder brother smiled when he heard that, and
thought to himself: ‘Goodness, what a blockhead that brother of mine is!
He will never be good for anything as long as he lives! He who wants to
be a sickle must bend himself betimes.’

The father sighed, and answered him: ‘You shall soon learn what it is to
shudder, but you will not earn your bread by that.’

Soon after this the sexton came to the house on a visit, and the father
bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son was so backward
in every respect that he knew nothing and learnt nothing. ‘Just think,’
said he, ‘when I asked him how he was going to earn his bread, he
actually wanted to learn to shudder.’ ‘If that be all,’ replied the
sexton, ‘he can learn that with me. Send him to me, and I will soon
polish him.’ The father was glad to do it, for he thought: ‘It will
train the boy a little.’ The sexton therefore took him into his house,
and he had to ring the church bell. After a day or two, the sexton awoke
him at midnight, and bade him arise and go up into the church tower and
ring the bell. ‘You shall soon learn what shuddering is,’ thought he,
and secretly went there before him; and when the boy was at the top of
the tower and turned round, and was just going to take hold of the bell
rope, he saw a white figure standing on the stairs opposite the sounding
hole. ‘Who is there?’ cried he, but the figure made no reply, and did
not move or stir. ‘Give an answer,’ cried the boy, ‘or take yourself
off, you have no business here at night.’

The sexton, however, remained standing motionless that the boy might
think he was a ghost. The boy cried a second time: ‘What do you want
here?--speak if you are an honest fellow, or I will throw you down the
steps!’ The sexton thought: ‘He can’t mean to be as bad as his words,’
uttered no sound and stood as if he were made of stone. Then the boy
called to him for the third time, and as that was also to no purpose,
he ran against him and pushed the ghost down the stairs, so that it fell
down the ten steps and remained lying there in a corner. Thereupon he
rang the bell, went home, and without saying a word went to bed, and
fell asleep. The sexton’s wife waited a long time for her husband, but
he did not come back. At length she became uneasy, and wakened the boy,
and asked: ‘Do you know where my husband is? He climbed up the tower
before you did.’ ‘No, I don’t know,’ replied the boy, ‘but someone was
standing by the sounding hole on the other side of the steps, and as he
would neither give an answer nor go away, I took him for a scoundrel,
and threw him downstairs. Just go there and you will see if it was he.
I should be sorry if it were.’ The woman ran away and found her husband,
who was lying moaning in the corner, and had broken his leg.

She carried him down, and then with loud screams she hastened to the
boy’s father, ‘Your boy,’ cried she, ‘has been the cause of a great
misfortune! He has thrown my husband down the steps so that he broke his
leg. Take the good-for-nothing fellow out of our house.’ The father was
terrified, and ran thither and scolded the boy. ‘What wicked tricks
are these?’ said he. ‘The devil must have put them into your head.’
‘Father,’ he replied, ‘do listen to me. I am quite innocent. He was
standing there by night like one intent on doing evil. I did not know
who it was, and I entreated him three times either to speak or to go
away.’ ‘Ah,’ said the father, ‘I have nothing but unhappiness with you.
Go out of my sight. I will see you no more.’

‘Yes, father, right willingly, wait only until it is day. Then will I
go forth and learn how to shudder, and then I shall, at any rate,
understand one art which will support me.’ ‘Learn what you will,’ spoke
the father, ‘it is all the same to me. Here are fifty talers for you.
Take these and go into the wide world, and tell no one from whence you
come, and who is your father, for I have reason to be ashamed of you.’
‘Yes, father, it shall be as you will. If you desire nothing more than
that, I can easily keep it in mind.’

When the day dawned, therefore, the boy put his fifty talers into his
pocket, and went forth on the great highway, and continually said to
himself: ‘If I could but shudder! If I could but shudder!’ Then a man
approached who heard this conversation which the youth was holding with
himself, and when they had walked a little farther to where they could
see the gallows, the man said to him: ‘Look, there is the tree where
seven men have married the ropemaker’s daughter, and are now learning
how to fly. Sit down beneath it, and wait till night comes, and you will
soon learn how to shudder.’ ‘If that is all that is wanted,’ answered
the youth, ‘it is easily done; but if I learn how to shudder as fast as
that, you shall have my fifty talers. Just come back to me early in the
morning.’ Then the youth went to the gallows, sat down beneath it, and
waited till evening came. And as he was cold, he lighted himself a fire,
but at midnight the wind blew so sharply that in spite of his fire, he
could not get warm. And as the wind knocked the hanged men against each
other, and they moved backwards and forwards, he thought to himself:
‘If you shiver below by the fire, how those up above must freeze and
suffer!’ And as he felt pity for them, he raised the ladder, and climbed
up, unbound one of them after the other, and brought down all seven.
Then he stoked the fire, blew it, and set them all round it to warm
themselves. But they sat there and did not stir, and the fire caught
their clothes. So he said: ‘Take care, or I will hang you up again.’ The
dead men, however, did not hear, but were quite silent, and let their
rags go on burning. At this he grew angry, and said: ‘If you will not
take care, I cannot help you, I will not be burnt with you,’ and he hung
them up again each in his turn. Then he sat down by his fire and fell
asleep, and the next morning the man came to him and wanted to have
the fifty talers, and said: ‘Well do you know how to shudder?’ ‘No,’
answered he, ‘how should I know? Those fellows up there did not open
their mouths, and were so stupid that they let the few old rags which
they had on their bodies get burnt.’ Then the man saw that he would not
get the fifty talers that day, and went away saying: ‘Such a youth has
never come my way before.’

The youth likewise went his way, and once more began to mutter to
himself: ‘Ah, if I could but shudder! Ah, if I could but shudder!’ A
waggoner who was striding behind him heard this and asked: ‘Who are
you?’ ‘I don’t know,’ answered the youth. Then the waggoner asked: ‘From
whence do you come?’ ‘I know not.’ ‘Who is your father?’ ‘That I may
not tell you.’ ‘What is it that you are always muttering between your
teeth?’ ‘Ah,’ replied the youth, ‘I do so wish I could shudder, but
no one can teach me how.’ ‘Enough of your foolish chatter,’ said the
waggoner. ‘Come, go with me, I will see about a place for you.’ The
youth went with the waggoner, and in the evening they arrived at an inn
where they wished to pass the night. Then at the entrance of the parlour
the youth again said quite loudly: ‘If I could but shudder! If I could
but shudder!’ The host who heard this, laughed and said: ‘If that is
your desire, there ought to be a good opportunity for you here.’ ‘Ah,
be silent,’ said the hostess, ‘so many prying persons have already lost
their lives, it would be a pity and a shame if such beautiful eyes as
these should never see the daylight again.’

But the youth said: ‘However difficult it may be, I will learn it. For
this purpose indeed have I journeyed forth.’ He let the host have
no rest, until the latter told him, that not far from thence stood a
haunted castle where anyone could very easily learn what shuddering was,
if he would but watch in it for three nights. The king had promised that
he who would venture should have his daughter to wife, and she was the
most beautiful maiden the sun shone on. Likewise in the castle lay great
treasures, which were guarded by evil spirits, and these treasures would
then be freed, and would make a poor man rich enough. Already many men
had gone into the castle, but as yet none had come out again. Then the
youth went next morning to the king, and said: ‘If it be allowed, I will
willingly watch three nights in the haunted castle.’

The king looked at him, and as the youth pleased him, he said: ‘You may
ask for three things to take into the castle with you, but they must
be things without life.’ Then he answered: ‘Then I ask for a fire, a
turning lathe, and a cutting-board with the knife.’

The king had these things carried into the castle for him during the
day. When night was drawing near, the youth went up and made himself
a bright fire in one of the rooms, placed the cutting-board and knife
beside it, and seated himself by the turning-lathe. ‘Ah, if I could
but shudder!’ said he, ‘but I shall not learn it here either.’ Towards
midnight he was about to poke his fire, and as he was blowing it,
something cried suddenly from one corner: ‘Au, miau! how cold we are!’
‘You fools!’ cried he, ‘what are you crying about? If you are cold, come
and take a seat by the fire and warm yourselves.’ And when he had said
that, two great black cats came with one tremendous leap and sat down
on each side of him, and looked savagely at him with their fiery
eyes. After a short time, when they had warmed themselves, they said:
‘Comrade, shall we have a game of cards?’ ‘Why not?’ he replied, ‘but
just show me your paws.’ Then they stretched out their claws. ‘Oh,’ said
he, ‘what long nails you have! Wait, I must first cut them for you.’
Thereupon he seized them by the throats, put them on the cutting-board
and screwed their feet fast. ‘I have looked at your fingers,’ said he,
‘and my fancy for card-playing has gone,’ and he struck them dead and
threw them out into the water. But when he had made away with these two,
and was about to sit down again by his fire, out from every hole and
corner came black cats and black dogs with red-hot chains, and more
and more of them came until he could no longer move, and they yelled
horribly, and got on his fire, pulled it to pieces, and tried to put
it out. He watched them for a while quietly, but at last when they were
going too far, he seized his cutting-knife, and cried: ‘Away with you,
vermin,’ and began to cut them down. Some of them ran away, the others
he killed, and threw out into the fish-pond. When he came back he fanned
the embers of his fire again and warmed himself. And as he thus sat, his
eyes would keep open no longer, and he felt a desire to sleep. Then he
looked round and saw a great bed in the corner. ‘That is the very thing
for me,’ said he, and got into it. When he was just going to shut his
eyes, however, the bed began to move of its own accord, and went over
the whole of the castle. ‘That’s right,’ said he, ‘but go faster.’ Then
the bed rolled on as if six horses were harnessed to it, up and down,
over thresholds and stairs, but suddenly hop, hop, it turned over upside
down, and lay on him like a mountain. But he threw quilts and pillows up
in the air, got out and said: ‘Now anyone who likes, may drive,’ and
lay down by his fire, and slept till it was day. In the morning the king
came, and when he saw him lying there on the ground, he thought the evil
spirits had killed him and he was dead. Then said he: ‘After all it is a
pity,--for so handsome a man.’ The youth heard it, got up, and said: ‘It
has not come to that yet.’ Then the king was astonished, but very glad,
and asked how he had fared. ‘Very well indeed,’ answered he; ‘one
night is past, the two others will pass likewise.’ Then he went to the
innkeeper, who opened his eyes very wide, and said: ‘I never expected to
see you alive again! Have you learnt how to shudder yet?’ ‘No,’ said he,
‘it is all in vain. If someone would but tell me!’

The second night he again went up into the old castle, sat down by the
fire, and once more began his old song: ‘If I could but shudder!’ When
midnight came, an uproar and noise of tumbling about was heard; at
first it was low, but it grew louder and louder. Then it was quiet for
a while, and at length with a loud scream, half a man came down the
chimney and fell before him. ‘Hullo!’ cried he, ‘another half belongs
to this. This is not enough!’ Then the uproar began again, there was a
roaring and howling, and the other half fell down likewise. ‘Wait,’ said
he, ‘I will just stoke up the fire a little for you.’ When he had done
that and looked round again, the two pieces were joined together, and a
hideous man was sitting in his place. ‘That is no part of our bargain,’
said the youth, ‘the bench is mine.’ The man wanted to push him away;
the youth, however, would not allow that, but thrust him off with all
his strength, and seated himself again in his own place. Then still more
men fell down, one after the other; they brought nine dead men’s legs
and two skulls, and set them up and played at nine-pins with them. The
youth also wanted to play and said: ‘Listen you, can I join you?’ ‘Yes,
if you have any money.’ ‘Money enough,’ replied he, ‘but your balls are
not quite round.’ Then he took the skulls and put them in the lathe and
turned them till they were round. ‘There, now they will roll better!’
said he. ‘Hurrah! now we’ll have fun!’ He played with them and lost some
of his money, but when it struck twelve, everything vanished from his
sight. He lay down and quietly fell asleep. Next morning the king came
to inquire after him. ‘How has it fared with you this time?’ asked he.
‘I have been playing at nine-pins,’ he answered, ‘and have lost a couple
of farthings.’ ‘Have you not shuddered then?’ ‘What?’ said he, ‘I have
had a wonderful time! If I did but know what it was to shudder!’

The third night he sat down again on his bench and said quite sadly:
‘If I could but shudder.’ When it grew late, six tall men came in and
brought a coffin. Then he said: ‘Ha, ha, that is certainly my little
cousin, who died only a few days ago,’ and he beckoned with his finger,
and cried: ‘Come, little cousin, come.’ They placed the coffin on the
ground, but he went to it and took the lid off, and a dead man lay
therein. He felt his face, but it was cold as ice. ‘Wait,’ said he, ‘I
will warm you a little,’ and went to the fire and warmed his hand and
laid it on the dead man’s face, but he remained cold. Then he took him
out, and sat down by the fire and laid him on his breast and rubbed his
arms that the blood might circulate again. As this also did no good, he
thought to himself: ‘When two people lie in bed together, they warm each
other,’ and carried him to the bed, covered him over and lay down by
him. After a short time the dead man became warm too, and began to move.
Then said the youth, ‘See, little cousin, have I not warmed you?’ The
dead man, however, got up and cried: ‘Now will I strangle you.’

‘What!’ said he, ‘is that the way you thank me? You shall at once go
into your coffin again,’ and he took him up, threw him into it, and shut
the lid. Then came the six men and carried him away again. ‘I cannot
manage to shudder,’ said he. ‘I shall never learn it here as long as I
live.’

Then a man entered who was taller than all others, and looked terrible.
He was old, however, and had a long white beard. ‘You wretch,’ cried he,
‘you shall soon learn what it is to shudder, for you shall die.’ ‘Not so
fast,’ replied the youth. ‘If I am to die, I shall have to have a say
in it.’ ‘I will soon seize you,’ said the fiend. ‘Softly, softly, do not
talk so big. I am as strong as you are, and perhaps even stronger.’
‘We shall see,’ said the old man. ‘If you are stronger, I will let you
go--come, we will try.’ Then he led him by dark passages to a smith’s
forge, took an axe, and with one blow struck an anvil into the ground.
‘I can do better than that,’ said the youth, and went to the other
anvil. The old man placed himself near and wanted to look on, and his
white beard hung down. Then the youth seized the axe, split the anvil
with one blow, and in it caught the old man’s beard. ‘Now I have you,’
said the youth. ‘Now it is your turn to die.’ Then he seized an iron bar
and beat the old man till he moaned and entreated him to stop, when he
would give him great riches. The youth drew out the axe and let him go.
The old man led him back into the castle, and in a cellar showed him
three chests full of gold. ‘Of these,’ said he, ‘one part is for the
poor, the other for the king, the third yours.’ In the meantime it
struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, so that the youth stood in
darkness. ‘I shall still be able to find my way out,’ said he, and felt
about, found the way into the room, and slept there by his fire.
Next morning the king came and said: ‘Now you must have learnt what
shuddering is?’ ‘No,’ he answered; ‘what can it be? My dead cousin was
here, and a bearded man came and showed me a great deal of money down
below, but no one told me what it was to shudder.’ ‘Then,’ said the
king, ‘you have saved the castle, and shall marry my daughter.’ ‘That
is all very well,’ said he, ‘but still I do not know what it is to
shudder!’

Then the gold was brought up and the wedding celebrated; but howsoever
much the young king loved his wife, and however happy he was, he still
said always: ‘If I could but shudder--if I could but shudder.’ And this
at last angered her. Her waiting-maid said: ‘I will find a cure for him;
he shall soon learn what it is to shudder.’ She went out to the stream
which flowed through the garden, and had a whole bucketful of gudgeons
brought to her. At night when the young king was sleeping, his wife was
to draw the clothes off him and empty the bucket full of cold water
with the gudgeons in it over him, so that the little fishes would
sprawl about him. Then he woke up and cried: ‘Oh, what makes me shudder
so?--what makes me shudder so, dear wife? Ah! now I know what it is to
shudder!’




KING GRISLY-BEARD

A great king of a land far away in the East had a daughter who was very
beautiful, but so proud, and haughty, and conceited, that none of the
princes who came to ask her in marriage was good enough for her, and she
only made sport of them.

Once upon a time the king held a great feast, and asked thither all
her suitors; and they all sat in a row, ranged according to their
rank--kings, and princes, and dukes, and earls, and counts, and barons,
and knights. Then the princess came in, and as she passed by them she
had something spiteful to say to every one. The first was too fat: ‘He’s
as round as a tub,’ said she. The next was too tall: ‘What a maypole!’
said she. The next was too short: ‘What a dumpling!’ said she. The
fourth was too pale, and she called him ‘Wallface.’ The fifth was too
red, so she called him ‘Coxcomb.’ The sixth was not straight enough;
so she said he was like a green stick, that had been laid to dry over
a baker’s oven. And thus she had some joke to crack upon every one: but
she laughed more than all at a good king who was there. ‘Look at
him,’ said she; ‘his beard is like an old mop; he shall be called
Grisly-beard.’ So the king got the nickname of Grisly-beard.

But the old king was very angry when he saw how his daughter behaved,
and how she ill-treated all his guests; and he vowed that, willing or
unwilling, she should marry the first man, be he prince or beggar, that
came to the door.

Two days after there came by a travelling fiddler, who began to play
under the window and beg alms; and when the king heard him, he said,
‘Let him come in.’ So they brought in a dirty-looking fellow; and when
he had sung before the king and the princess, he begged a boon. Then the
king said, ‘You have sung so well, that I will give you my daughter for
your wife.’ The princess begged and prayed; but the king said, ‘I have
sworn to give you to the first comer, and I will keep my word.’ So words
and tears were of no avail; the parson was sent for, and she was married
to the fiddler. When this was over the king said, ‘Now get ready to
go--you must not stay here--you must travel on with your husband.’

Then the fiddler went his way, and took her with him, and they soon came
to a great wood. ‘Pray,’ said she, ‘whose is this wood?’ ‘It belongs
to King Grisly-beard,’ answered he; ‘hadst thou taken him, all had been
thine.’ ‘Ah! unlucky wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘would that I had
married King Grisly-beard!’ Next they came to some fine meadows. ‘Whose
are these beautiful green meadows?’ said she. ‘They belong to King
Grisly-beard, hadst thou taken him, they had all been thine.’ ‘Ah!
unlucky wretch that I am!’ said she; ‘would that I had married King
Grisly-beard!’

Then they came to a great city. ‘Whose is this noble city?’ said she.
‘It belongs to King Grisly-beard; hadst thou taken him, it had all been
thine.’ ‘Ah! wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘why did I not marry King
Grisly-beard?’ ‘That is no business of mine,’ said the fiddler: ‘why
should you wish for another husband? Am not I good enough for you?’

At last they came to a small cottage. ‘What a paltry place!’ said she;
‘to whom does that little dirty hole belong?’ Then the fiddler said,
‘That is your and my house, where we are to live.’ ‘Where are your
servants?’ cried she. ‘What do we want with servants?’ said he; ‘you
must do for yourself whatever is to be done. Now make the fire, and put
on water and cook my supper, for I am very tired.’ But the princess knew
nothing of making fires and cooking, and the fiddler was forced to help
her. When they had eaten a very scanty meal they went to bed; but the
fiddler called her up very early in the morning to clean the house. Thus
they lived for two days: and when they had eaten up all there was in the
cottage, the man said, ‘Wife, we can’t go on thus, spending money and
earning nothing. You must learn to weave baskets.’ Then he went out and
cut willows, and brought them home, and she began to weave; but it made
her fingers very sore. ‘I see this work won’t do,’ said he: ‘try and
spin; perhaps you will do that better.’ So she sat down and tried to
spin; but the threads cut her tender fingers till the blood ran. ‘See
now,’ said the fiddler, ‘you are good for nothing; you can do no work:
what a bargain I have got! However, I’ll try and set up a trade in pots
and pans, and you shall stand in the market and sell them.’ ‘Alas!’
sighed she, ‘if any of my father’s court should pass by and see me
standing in the market, how they will laugh at me!’

But her husband did not care for that, and said she must work, if she
did not wish to die of hunger. At first the trade went well; for many
people, seeing such a beautiful woman, went to buy her wares, and paid
their money without thinking of taking away the goods. They lived on
this as long as it lasted; and then her husband bought a fresh lot of
ware, and she sat herself down with it in the corner of the market; but
a drunken soldier soon came by, and rode his horse against her stall,
and broke all her goods into a thousand pieces. Then she began to cry,
and knew not what to do. ‘Ah! what will become of me?’ said she; ‘what
will my husband say?’ So she ran home and told him all. ‘Who would
have thought you would have been so silly,’ said he, ‘as to put an
earthenware stall in the corner of the market, where everybody passes?
but let us have no more crying; I see you are not fit for this sort of
work, so I have been to the king’s palace, and asked if they did not
want a kitchen-maid; and they say they will take you, and there you will
have plenty to eat.’

Thus the princess became a kitchen-maid, and helped the cook to do all
the dirtiest work; but she was allowed to carry home some of the meat
that was left, and on this they lived.

She had not been there long before she heard that the king’s eldest son
was passing by, going to be married; and she went to one of the windows
and looked out. Everything was ready, and all the pomp and brightness of
the court was there. Then she bitterly grieved for the pride and folly
which had brought her so low. And the servants gave her some of the rich
meats, which she put into her basket to take home.

All on a sudden, as she was going out, in came the king’s son in golden
clothes; and when he saw a beautiful woman at the door, he took her
by the hand, and said she should be his partner in the dance; but she
trembled for fear, for she saw that it was King Grisly-beard, who was
making sport of her. However, he kept fast hold, and led her in; and the
cover of the basket came off, so that the meats in it fell about. Then
everybody laughed and jeered at her; and she was so abashed, that she
wished herself a thousand feet deep in the earth. She sprang to the
door to run away; but on the steps King Grisly-beard overtook her, and
brought her back and said, ‘Fear me not! I am the fiddler who has lived
with you in the hut. I brought you there because I really loved you. I
am also the soldier that overset your stall. I have done all this only
to cure you of your silly pride, and to show you the folly of your
ill-treatment of me. Now all is over: you have learnt wisdom, and it is
time to hold our marriage feast.’

Then the chamberlains came and brought her the most beautiful robes; and
her father and his whole court were there already, and welcomed her home
on her marriage. Joy was in every face and every heart. The feast was
grand; they danced and sang; all were merry; and I only wish that you
and I had been of the party.




IRON HANS

There was once upon a time a king who had a great forest near his
palace, full of all kinds of wild animals. One day he sent out a
huntsman to shoot him a roe, but he did not come back. ‘Perhaps some
accident has befallen him,’ said the king, and the next day he sent out
two more huntsmen who were to search for him, but they too stayed away.
Then on the third day, he sent for all his huntsmen, and said: ‘Scour
the whole forest through, and do not give up until you have found all
three.’ But of these also, none came home again, none were seen again.
From that time forth, no one would any longer venture into the forest,
and it lay there in deep stillness and solitude, and nothing was seen
of it, but sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over it. This lasted for
many years, when an unknown huntsman announced himself to the king as
seeking a situation, and offered to go into the dangerous forest. The
king, however, would not give his consent, and said: ‘It is not safe in
there; I fear it would fare with you no better than with the others,
and you would never come out again.’ The huntsman replied: ‘Lord, I will
venture it at my own risk, of fear I know nothing.’

The huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest. It was
not long before the dog fell in with some game on the way, and wanted to
pursue it; but hardly had the dog run two steps when it stood before a
deep pool, could go no farther, and a naked arm stretched itself out of
the water, seized it, and drew it under. When the huntsman saw that, he
went back and fetched three men to come with buckets and bale out the
water. When they could see to the bottom there lay a wild man whose body
was brown like rusty iron, and whose hair hung over his face down to his
knees. They bound him with cords, and led him away to the castle. There
was great astonishment over the wild man; the king, however, had him put
in an iron cage in his courtyard, and forbade the door to be opened
on pain of death, and the queen herself was to take the key into her
keeping. And from this time forth everyone could again go into the
forest with safety.

The king had a son of eight years, who was once playing in the
courtyard, and while he was playing, his golden ball fell into the cage.
The boy ran thither and said: ‘Give me my ball out.’ ‘Not till you have
opened the door for me,’ answered the man. ‘No,’ said the boy, ‘I will
not do that; the king has forbidden it,’ and ran away. The next day he
again went and asked for his ball; the wild man said: ‘Open my door,’
but the boy would not. On the third day the king had ridden out hunting,
and the boy went once more and said: ‘I cannot open the door even if I
wished, for I have not the key.’ Then the wild man said: ‘It lies under
your mother’s pillow, you can get it there.’ The boy, who wanted to have
his ball back, cast all thought to the winds, and brought the key. The
door opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his fingers. When it
was open the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball, and hurried
away. The boy had become afraid; he called and cried after him: ‘Oh,
wild man, do not go away, or I shall be beaten!’ The wild man turned
back, took him up, set him on his shoulder, and went with hasty steps
into the forest. When the king came home, he observed the empty cage,
and asked the queen how that had happened. She knew nothing about it,
and sought the key, but it was gone. She called the boy, but no one
answered. The king sent out people to seek for him in the fields, but
they did not find him. Then he could easily guess what had happened, and
much grief reigned in the royal court.

When the wild man had once more reached the dark forest, he took the boy
down from his shoulder, and said to him: ‘You will never see your father
and mother again, but I will keep you with me, for you have set me free,
and I have compassion on you. If you do all I bid you, you shall fare
well. Of treasure and gold have I enough, and more than anyone in the
world.’ He made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept, and the
next morning the man took him to a well, and said: ‘Behold, the gold
well is as bright and clear as crystal, you shall sit beside it, and
take care that nothing falls into it, or it will be polluted. I will
come every evening to see if you have obeyed my order.’ The boy placed
himself by the brink of the well, and often saw a golden fish or a
golden snake show itself therein, and took care that nothing fell in.
As he was thus sitting, his finger hurt him so violently that he
involuntarily put it in the water. He drew it quickly out again, but saw
that it was quite gilded, and whatsoever pains he took to wash the gold
off again, all was to no purpose. In the evening Iron Hans came back,
looked at the boy, and said: ‘What has happened to the well?’ ‘Nothing
nothing,’ he answered, and held his finger behind his back, that the
man might not see it. But he said: ‘You have dipped your finger into
the water, this time it may pass, but take care you do not again let
anything go in.’ By daybreak the boy was already sitting by the well and
watching it. His finger hurt him again and he passed it over his head,
and then unhappily a hair fell down into the well. He took it quickly
out, but it was already quite gilded. Iron Hans came, and already knew
what had happened. ‘You have let a hair fall into the well,’ said he.
‘I will allow you to watch by it once more, but if this happens for the
third time then the well is polluted and you can no longer remain with
me.’

On the third day, the boy sat by the well, and did not stir his finger,
however much it hurt him. But the time was long to him, and he looked at
the reflection of his face on the surface of the water. And as he
still bent down more and more while he was doing so, and trying to look
straight into the eyes, his long hair fell down from his shoulders into
the water. He raised himself up quickly, but the whole of the hair of
his head was already golden and shone like the sun. You can imagine how
terrified the poor boy was! He took his pocket-handkerchief and tied it
round his head, in order that the man might not see it. When he came he
already knew everything, and said: ‘Take the handkerchief off.’ Then the
golden hair streamed forth, and let the boy excuse himself as he might,
it was of no use. ‘You have not stood the trial and can stay here no
longer. Go forth into the world, there you will learn what poverty is.
But as you have not a bad heart, and as I mean well by you, there is
one thing I will grant you; if you fall into any difficulty, come to the
forest and cry: “Iron Hans,” and then I will come and help you. My
power is great, greater than you think, and I have gold and silver in
abundance.’

Then the king’s son left the forest, and walked by beaten and unbeaten
paths ever onwards until at length he reached a great city. There he
looked for work, but could find none, and he learnt nothing by which he
could help himself. At length he went to the palace, and asked if they
would take him in. The people about court did not at all know what use
they could make of him, but they liked him, and told him to stay. At
length the cook took him into his service, and said he might carry wood
and water, and rake the cinders together. Once when it so happened that
no one else was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the food to the
royal table, but as he did not like to let his golden hair be seen, he
kept his little cap on. Such a thing as that had never yet come under
the king’s notice, and he said: ‘When you come to the royal table you
must take your hat off.’ He answered: ‘Ah, Lord, I cannot; I have a bad
sore place on my head.’ Then the king had the cook called before him
and scolded him, and asked how he could take such a boy as that into his
service; and that he was to send him away at once. The cook, however,
had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener’s boy.

And now the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig, and bear
the wind and bad weather. Once in summer when he was working alone in
the garden, the day was so warm he took his little cap off that the air
might cool him. As the sun shone on his hair it glittered and flashed so
that the rays fell into the bedroom of the king’s daughter, and up she
sprang to see what that could be. Then she saw the boy, and cried to
him: ‘Boy, bring me a wreath of flowers.’ He put his cap on with all
haste, and gathered wild field-flowers and bound them together. When he
was ascending the stairs with them, the gardener met him, and said: ‘How
can you take the king’s daughter a garland of such common flowers? Go
quickly, and get another, and seek out the prettiest and rarest.’ ‘Oh,
no,’ replied the boy, ‘the wild ones have more scent, and will please
her better.’ When he got into the room, the king’s daughter said: ‘Take
your cap off, it is not seemly to keep it on in my presence.’ He again
said: ‘I may not, I have a sore head.’ She, however, caught at his
cap and pulled it off, and then his golden hair rolled down on his
shoulders, and it was splendid to behold. He wanted to run out, but she
held him by the arm, and gave him a handful of ducats. With these he
departed, but he cared nothing for the gold pieces. He took them to the
gardener, and said: ‘I present them to your children, they can play with
them.’ The following day the king’s daughter again called to him that he
was to bring her a wreath of field-flowers, and then he went in with it,
she instantly snatched at his cap, and wanted to take it away from him,
but he held it fast with both hands. She again gave him a handful of
ducats, but he would not keep them, and gave them to the gardener for
playthings for his children. On the third day things went just the
same; she could not get his cap away from him, and he would not have her
money.

Not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war. The king gathered
together his people, and did not know whether or not he could offer any
opposition to the enemy, who was superior in strength and had a mighty
army. Then said the gardener’s boy: ‘I am grown up, and will go to the
wars also, only give me a horse.’ The others laughed, and said: ‘Seek
one for yourself when we are gone, we will leave one behind us in the
stable for you.’ When they had gone forth, he went into the stable, and
led the horse out; it was lame of one foot, and limped hobblety jib,
hobblety jib; nevertheless he mounted it, and rode away to the dark
forest. When he came to the outskirts, he called ‘Iron Hans’ three
times so loudly that it echoed through the trees. Thereupon the wild man
appeared immediately, and said: ‘What do you desire?’ ‘I want a strong
steed, for I am going to the wars.’ ‘That you shall have, and still more
than you ask for.’ Then the wild man went back into the forest, and it
was not long before a stable-boy came out of it, who led a horse that
snorted with its nostrils, and could hardly be restrained, and behind
them followed a great troop of warriors entirely equipped in iron, and
their swords flashed in the sun. The youth made over his three-legged
horse to the stable-boy, mounted the other, and rode at the head of the
soldiers. When he got near the battlefield a great part of the king’s
men had already fallen, and little was wanting to make the rest give
way. Then the youth galloped thither with his iron soldiers, broke like
a hurricane over the enemy, and beat down all who opposed him. They
began to flee, but the youth pursued, and never stopped, until there
was not a single man left. Instead of returning to the king, however, he
conducted his troop by byways back to the forest, and called forth Iron
Hans. ‘What do you desire?’ asked the wild man. ‘Take back your horse
and your troops, and give me my three-legged horse again.’ All that he
asked was done, and soon he was riding on his three-legged horse. When
the king returned to his palace, his daughter went to meet him, and
wished him joy of his victory. ‘I am not the one who carried away the
victory,’ said he, ‘but a strange knight who came to my assistance with
his soldiers.’ The daughter wanted to hear who the strange knight was,
but the king did not know, and said: ‘He followed the enemy, and I did
not see him again.’ She inquired of the gardener where his boy was, but
he smiled, and said: ‘He has just come home on his three-legged horse,
and the others have been mocking him, and crying: “Here comes our
hobblety jib back again!” They asked, too: “Under what hedge have you
been lying sleeping all the time?” So he said: “I did the best of all,
and it would have gone badly without me.” And then he was still more
ridiculed.’

The king said to his daughter: ‘I will proclaim a great feast that shall
last for three days, and you shall throw a golden apple. Perhaps the
unknown man will show himself.’ When the feast was announced, the youth
went out to the forest, and called Iron Hans. ‘What do you desire?’
asked he. ‘That I may catch the king’s daughter’s golden apple.’ ‘It is
as safe as if you had it already,’ said Iron Hans. ‘You shall likewise
have a suit of red armour for the occasion, and ride on a spirited
chestnut-horse.’ When the day came, the youth galloped to the spot, took
his place amongst the knights, and was recognized by no one. The king’s
daughter came forward, and threw a golden apple to the knights, but none
of them caught it but he, only as soon as he had it he galloped away.

On the second day Iron Hans equipped him as a white knight, and gave him
a white horse. Again he was the only one who caught the apple, and
he did not linger an instant, but galloped off with it. The king grew
angry, and said: ‘That is not allowed; he must appear before me and tell
his name.’ He gave the order that if the knight who caught the apple,
should go away again they should pursue him, and if he would not come
back willingly, they were to cut him down and stab him.

On the third day, he received from Iron Hans a suit of black armour and
a black horse, and again he caught the apple. But when he was riding off
with it, the king’s attendants pursued him, and one of them got so near
him that he wounded the youth’s leg with the point of his sword. The
youth nevertheless escaped from them, but his horse leapt so violently
that the helmet fell from the youth’s head, and they could see that he
had golden hair. They rode back and announced this to the king.

The following day the king’s daughter asked the gardener about his
boy. ‘He is at work in the garden; the queer creature has been at the
festival too, and only came home yesterday evening; he has likewise
shown my children three golden apples which he has won.’

The king had him summoned into his presence, and he came and again had
his little cap on his head. But the king’s daughter went up to him and
took it off, and then his golden hair fell down over his shoulders, and
he was so handsome that all were amazed. ‘Are you the knight who came
every day to the festival, always in different colours, and who caught
the three golden apples?’ asked the king. ‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘and here
the apples are,’ and he took them out of his pocket, and returned them
to the king. ‘If you desire further proof, you may see the wound which
your people gave me when they followed me. But I am likewise the knight
who helped you to your victory over your enemies.’ ‘If you can perform
such deeds as that, you are no gardener’s boy; tell me, who is your
father?’ ‘My father is a mighty king, and gold have I in plenty as great
as I require.’ ‘I well see,’ said the king, ‘that I owe my thanks to
you; can I do anything to please you?’ ‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘that indeed
you can. Give me your daughter to wife.’ The maiden laughed, and said:
‘He does not stand much on ceremony, but I have already seen by his
golden hair that he was no gardener’s boy,’ and then she went and
kissed him. His father and mother came to the wedding, and were in great
delight, for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear
son again. And as they were sitting at the marriage-feast, the music
suddenly stopped, the doors opened, and a stately king came in with a
great retinue. He went up to the youth, embraced him and said: ‘I am
Iron Hans, and was by enchantment a wild man, but you have set me free;
all the treasures which I possess, shall be your property.’




CAT-SKIN

There was once a king, whose queen had hair of the purest gold, and was
so beautiful that her match was not to be met with on the whole face of
the earth. But this beautiful queen fell ill, and when she felt that her
end drew near she called the king to her and said, ‘Promise me that you
will never marry again, unless you meet with a wife who is as beautiful
as I am, and who has golden hair like mine.’ Then when the king in his
grief promised all she asked, she shut her eyes and died. But the king
was not to be comforted, and for a long time never thought of taking
another wife. At last, however, his wise men said, ‘this will not do;
the king must marry again, that we may have a queen.’ So messengers were
sent far and wide, to seek for a bride as beautiful as the late queen.
But there was no princess in the world so beautiful; and if there had
been, still there was not one to be found who had golden hair. So the
messengers came home, and had had all their trouble for nothing.

Now the king had a daughter, who was just as beautiful as her mother,
and had the same golden hair. And when she was grown up, the king looked
at her and saw that she was just like this late queen: then he said to
his courtiers, ‘May I not marry my daughter? She is the very image of my
dead wife: unless I have her, I shall not find any bride upon the whole
earth, and you say there must be a queen.’ When the courtiers heard this
they were shocked, and said, ‘Heaven forbid that a father should marry
his daughter! Out of so great a sin no good can come.’ And his daughter
was also shocked, but hoped the king would soon give up such thoughts;
so she said to him, ‘Before I marry anyone I must have three dresses:
one must be of gold, like the sun; another must be of shining silver,
like the moon; and a third must be dazzling as the stars: besides this,
I want a mantle of a thousand different kinds of fur put together, to
which every beast in the kingdom must give a part of his skin.’ And thus
she thought he would think of the matter no more. But the king made the
most skilful workmen in his kingdom weave the three dresses: one golden,
like the sun; another silvery, like the moon; and a third sparkling,
like the stars: and his hunters were told to hunt out all the beasts in
his kingdom, and to take the finest fur out of their skins: and thus a
mantle of a thousand furs was made.

When all were ready, the king sent them to her; but she got up in the
night when all were asleep, and took three of her trinkets, a golden
ring, a golden necklace, and a golden brooch, and packed the three
dresses--of the sun, the moon, and the stars--up in a nutshell, and
wrapped herself up in the mantle made of all sorts of fur, and besmeared
her face and hands with soot. Then she threw herself upon Heaven for
help in her need, and went away, and journeyed on the whole night, till
at last she came to a large wood. As she was very tired, she sat herself
down in the hollow of a tree and soon fell asleep: and there she slept
on till it was midday.

Now as the king to whom the wood belonged was hunting in it, his dogs
came to the tree, and began to snuff about, and run round and round, and
bark. ‘Look sharp!’ said the king to the huntsmen, ‘and see what sort
of game lies there.’ And the huntsmen went up to the tree, and when they
came back again said, ‘In the hollow tree there lies a most wonderful
beast, such as we never saw before; its skin seems to be of a thousand
kinds of fur, but there it lies fast asleep.’ ‘See,’ said the king, ‘if
you can catch it alive, and we will take it with us.’ So the huntsmen
took it up, and the maiden awoke and was greatly frightened, and said,
‘I am a poor child that has neither father nor mother left; have pity on
me and take me with you.’ Then they said, ‘Yes, Miss Cat-skin, you will
do for the kitchen; you can sweep up the ashes, and do things of that
sort.’ So they put her into the coach, and took her home to the king’s
palace. Then they showed her a little corner under the staircase, where
no light of day ever peeped in, and said, ‘Cat-skin, you may lie and
sleep there.’ And she was sent into the kitchen, and made to fetch wood
and water, to blow the fire, pluck the poultry, pick the herbs, sift the
ashes, and do all the dirty work.

Thus Cat-skin lived for a long time very sorrowfully. ‘Ah! pretty
princess!’ thought she, ‘what will now become of thee?’ But it happened
one day that a feast was to be held in the king’s castle, so she said to
the cook, ‘May I go up a little while and see what is going on? I will
take care and stand behind the door.’ And the cook said, ‘Yes, you may
go, but be back again in half an hour’s time, to rake out the ashes.’
Then she took her little lamp, and went into her cabin, and took off the
fur skin, and washed the soot from off her face and hands, so that her
beauty shone forth like the sun from behind the clouds. She next opened
her nutshell, and brought out of it the dress that shone like the sun,
and so went to the feast. Everyone made way for her, for nobody knew
her, and they thought she could be no less than a king’s daughter. But
the king came up to her, and held out his hand and danced with her; and
he thought in his heart, ‘I never saw any one half so beautiful.’

When the dance was at an end she curtsied; and when the king looked
round for her, she was gone, no one knew wither. The guards that stood
at the castle gate were called in: but they had seen no one. The truth
was, that she had run into her little cabin, pulled off her dress,
blackened her face and hands, put on the fur-skin cloak, and was
Cat-skin again. When she went into the kitchen to her work, and began
to rake the ashes, the cook said, ‘Let that alone till the morning, and
heat the king’s soup; I should like to run up now and give a peep: but
take care you don’t let a hair fall into it, or you will run a chance of
never eating again.’

As soon as the cook went away, Cat-skin heated the king’s soup, and
toasted a slice of bread first, as nicely as ever she could; and when it
was ready, she went and looked in the cabin for her little golden ring,
and put it into the dish in which the soup was. When the dance was over,
the king ordered his soup to be brought in; and it pleased him so well,
that he thought he had never tasted any so good before. At the bottom
he saw a gold ring lying; and as he could not make out how it had got
there, he ordered the cook to be sent for. The cook was frightened when
he heard the order, and said to Cat-skin, ‘You must have let a hair fall
into the soup; if it be so, you will have a good beating.’ Then he went
before the king, and he asked him who had cooked the soup. ‘I did,’
answered the cook. But the king said, ‘That is not true; it was better
done than you could do it.’ Then he answered, ‘To tell the truth I did
not cook it, but Cat-skin did.’ ‘Then let Cat-skin come up,’ said the
king: and when she came he said to her, ‘Who are you?’ ‘I am a poor
child,’ said she, ‘that has lost both father and mother.’ ‘How came you
in my palace?’ asked he. ‘I am good for nothing,’ said she, ‘but to be
scullion-girl, and to have boots and shoes thrown at my head.’ ‘But how
did you get the ring that was in the soup?’ asked the king. Then she
would not own that she knew anything about the ring; so the king sent
her away again about her business.

After a time there was another feast, and Cat-skin asked the cook to let
her go up and see it as before. ‘Yes,’ said he, ‘but come again in half
an hour, and cook the king the soup that he likes so much.’ Then she
ran to her little cabin, washed herself quickly, and took her dress
out which was silvery as the moon, and put it on; and when she went in,
looking like a king’s daughter, the king went up to her, and rejoiced at
seeing her again, and when the dance began he danced with her. After the
dance was at an end she managed to slip out, so slyly that the king did
not see where she was gone; but she sprang into her little cabin, and
made herself into Cat-skin again, and went into the kitchen to cook the
soup. Whilst the cook was above stairs, she got the golden necklace and
dropped it into the soup; then it was brought to the king, who ate it,
and it pleased him as well as before; so he sent for the cook, who
was again forced to tell him that Cat-skin had cooked it. Cat-skin was
brought again before the king, but she still told him that she was only
fit to have boots and shoes thrown at her head.

But when the king had ordered a feast to be got ready for the third
time, it happened just the same as before. ‘You must be a witch,
Cat-skin,’ said the cook; ‘for you always put something into your soup,
so that it pleases the king better than mine.’ However, he let her go up
as before. Then she put on her dress which sparkled like the stars, and
went into the ball-room in it; and the king danced with her again, and
thought she had never looked so beautiful as she did then. So whilst
he was dancing with her, he put a gold ring on her finger without her
seeing it, and ordered that the dance should be kept up a long time.
When it was at an end, he would have held her fast by the hand, but she
slipped away, and sprang so quickly through the crowd that he lost sight
of her: and she ran as fast as she could into her little cabin under
the stairs. But this time she kept away too long, and stayed beyond the
half-hour; so she had not time to take off her fine dress, and threw her
fur mantle over it, and in her haste did not blacken herself all over
with soot, but left one of her fingers white.

Then she ran into the kitchen, and cooked the king’s soup; and as soon
as the cook was gone, she put the golden brooch into the dish. When the
king got to the bottom, he ordered Cat-skin to be called once more, and
soon saw the white finger, and the ring that he had put on it whilst
they were dancing: so he seized her hand, and kept fast hold of it, and
when she wanted to loose herself and spring away, the fur cloak fell off
a little on one side, and the starry dress sparkled underneath it.

Then he got hold of the fur and tore it off, and her golden hair and
beautiful form were seen, and she could no longer hide herself: so she
washed the soot and ashes from her face, and showed herself to be the
most beautiful princess upon the face of the earth. But the king said,
‘You are my beloved bride, and we will never more be parted from each
other.’ And the wedding feast was held, and a merry day it was, as ever
was heard of or seen in that country, or indeed in any other.




SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED

There was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage. In front of
the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose-trees, one of which bore
white and the other red roses. She had two children who were like the
two rose-trees, and one was called Snow-white, and the other Rose-red.
They were as good and happy, as busy and cheerful as ever two children
in the world were, only Snow-white was more quiet and gentle than
Rose-red. Rose-red liked better to run about in the meadows and fields
seeking flowers and catching butterflies; but Snow-white sat at home
with her mother, and helped her with her housework, or read to her when
there was nothing to do.

The two children were so fond of one another that they always held each
other by the hand when they went out together, and when Snow-white said:
‘We will not leave each other,’ Rose-red answered: ‘Never so long as we
live,’ and their mother would add: ‘What one has she must share with the
other.’

They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries, and no
beasts did them any harm, but came close to them trustfully. The little
hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out of their hands, the roe grazed by
their side, the stag leapt merrily by them, and the birds sat still upon
the boughs, and sang whatever they knew.

No mishap overtook them; if they had stayed too late in the forest, and
night came on, they laid themselves down near one another upon the moss,
and slept until morning came, and their mother knew this and did not
worry on their account.

Once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn had roused
them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white dress sitting near
their bed. He got up and looked quite kindly at them, but said nothing
and went into the forest. And when they looked round they found that
they had been sleeping quite close to a precipice, and would certainly
have fallen into it in the darkness if they had gone only a few paces
further. And their mother told them that it must have been the angel who
watches over good children.

Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother’s little cottage so neat that
it was a pleasure to look inside it. In the summer Rose-red took care
of the house, and every morning laid a wreath of flowers by her mother’s
bed before she awoke, in which was a rose from each tree. In the winter
Snow-white lit the fire and hung the kettle on the hob. The kettle
was of brass and shone like gold, so brightly was it polished. In the
evening, when the snowflakes fell, the mother said: ‘Go, Snow-white, and
bolt the door,’ and then they sat round the hearth, and the mother took
her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book, and the two girls
listened as they sat and spun. And close by them lay a lamb upon the
floor, and behind them upon a perch sat a white dove with its head
hidden beneath its wings.

One evening, as they were thus sitting comfortably together, someone
knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in. The mother said:
‘Quick, Rose-red, open the door, it must be a traveller who is seeking
shelter.’ Rose-red went and pushed back the bolt, thinking that it was a
poor man, but it was not; it was a bear that stretched his broad, black
head within the door.

Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered,
and Snow-white hid herself behind her mother’s bed. But the bear began
to speak and said: ‘Do not be afraid, I will do you no harm! I am
half-frozen, and only want to warm myself a little beside you.’

‘Poor bear,’ said the mother, ‘lie down by the fire, only take care that
you do not burn your coat.’ Then she cried: ‘Snow-white, Rose-red, come
out, the bear will do you no harm, he means well.’ So they both came
out, and by-and-by the lamb and dove came nearer, and were not afraid
of him. The bear said: ‘Here, children, knock the snow out of my coat a
little’; so they brought the broom and swept the bear’s hide clean;
and he stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and
comfortably. It was not long before they grew quite at home, and played
tricks with their clumsy guest. They tugged his hair with their hands,
put their feet upon his back and rolled him about, or they took a
hazel-switch and beat him, and when he growled they laughed. But the
bear took it all in good part, only when they were too rough he called
out: ‘Leave me alive, children,

  Snow-white, Rose-red,
  Will you beat your wooer dead?’

When it was bed-time, and the others went to bed, the mother said to the
bear: ‘You can lie there by the hearth, and then you will be safe from
the cold and the bad weather.’ As soon as day dawned the two children
let him out, and he trotted across the snow into the forest.

Henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laid himself
down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselves with him as
much as they liked; and they got so used to him that the doors were
never fastened until their black friend had arrived.

When spring had come and all outside was green, the bear said one
morning to Snow-white: ‘Now I must go away, and cannot come back for the
whole summer.’ ‘Where are you going, then, dear bear?’ asked Snow-white.
‘I must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked
dwarfs. In the winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they are obliged
to stay below and cannot work their way through; but now, when the sun
has thawed and warmed the earth, they break through it, and come out to
pry and steal; and what once gets into their hands, and in their caves,
does not easily see daylight again.’

Snow-white was quite sorry at his departure, and as she unbolted the
door for him, and the bear was hurrying out, he caught against the bolt
and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off, and it seemed to Snow-white
as if she had seen gold shining through it, but she was not sure about
it. The bear ran away quickly, and was soon out of sight behind the
trees.

A short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the forest
to get firewood. There they found a big tree which lay felled on the
ground, and close by the trunk something was jumping backwards and
forwards in the grass, but they could not make out what it was. When
they came nearer they saw a dwarf with an old withered face and a
snow-white beard a yard long. The end of the beard was caught in a
crevice of the tree, and the little fellow was jumping about like a dog
tied to a rope, and did not know what to do.

He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried: ‘Why do you
stand there? Can you not come here and help me?’ ‘What are you up to,
little man?’ asked Rose-red. ‘You stupid, prying goose!’ answered the
dwarf: ‘I was going to split the tree to get a little wood for cooking.
The little bit of food that we people get is immediately burnt up with
heavy logs; we do not swallow so much as you coarse, greedy folk. I had
just driven the wedge safely in, and everything was going as I wished;
but the cursed wedge was too smooth and suddenly sprang out, and the
tree closed so quickly that I could not pull out my beautiful white
beard; so now it is tight and I cannot get away, and the silly, sleek,
milk-faced things laugh! Ugh! how odious you are!’

The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard out, it
was caught too fast. ‘I will run and fetch someone,’ said Rose-red. ‘You
senseless goose!’ snarled the dwarf; ‘why should you fetch someone? You
are already two too many for me; can you not think of something better?’
‘Don’t be impatient,’ said Snow-white, ‘I will help you,’ and she pulled
her scissors out of her pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.

As soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag which lay
amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold, and lifted it
up, grumbling to himself: ‘Uncouth people, to cut off a piece of my fine
beard. Bad luck to you!’ and then he swung the bag upon his back, and
went off without even once looking at the children.

Some time afterwards Snow-white and Rose-red went to catch a dish
of fish. As they came near the brook they saw something like a large
grasshopper jumping towards the water, as if it were going to leap in.
They ran to it and found it was the dwarf. ‘Where are you going?’ said
Rose-red; ‘you surely don’t want to go into the water?’ ‘I am not such
a fool!’ cried the dwarf; ‘don’t you see that the accursed fish wants
to pull me in?’ The little man had been sitting there fishing, and
unluckily the wind had tangled up his beard with the fishing-line; a
moment later a big fish made a bite and the feeble creature had not
strength to pull it out; the fish kept the upper hand and pulled the
dwarf towards him. He held on to all the reeds and rushes, but it was of
little good, for he was forced to follow the movements of the fish, and
was in urgent danger of being dragged into the water.

The girls came just in time; they held him fast and tried to free his
beard from the line, but all in vain, beard and line were entangled fast
together. There was nothing to do but to bring out the scissors and cut
the beard, whereby a small part of it was lost. When the dwarf saw that
he screamed out: ‘Is that civil, you toadstool, to disfigure a man’s
face? Was it not enough to clip off the end of my beard? Now you have
cut off the best part of it. I cannot let myself be seen by my people.
I wish you had been made to run the soles off your shoes!’ Then he took
out a sack of pearls which lay in the rushes, and without another word
he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.

It happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two children to the
town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons. The road led them
across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock lay strewn about. There
they noticed a large bird hovering in the air, flying slowly round and
round above them; it sank lower and lower, and at last settled near a
rock not far away. Immediately they heard a loud, piteous cry. They ran
up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance
the dwarf, and was going to carry him off.

The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the little man,
and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let his booty go.
As soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright he cried
with his shrill voice: ‘Could you not have done it more carefully! You
dragged at my brown coat so that it is all torn and full of holes, you
clumsy creatures!’ Then he took up a sack full of precious stones, and
slipped away again under the rock into his hole. The girls, who by
this time were used to his ingratitude, went on their way and did their
business in town.

As they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised the
dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in a clean spot,
and had not thought that anyone would come there so late. The evening
sun shone upon the brilliant stones; they glittered and sparkled with
all colours so beautifully that the children stood still and stared
at them. ‘Why do you stand gaping there?’ cried the dwarf, and his
ashen-grey face became copper-red with rage. He was still cursing when a
loud growling was heard, and a black bear came trotting towards them out
of the forest. The dwarf sprang up in a fright, but he could not reach
his cave, for the bear was already close. Then in the dread of his heart
he cried: ‘Dear Mr Bear, spare me, I will give you all my treasures;
look, the beautiful jewels lying there! Grant me my life; what do you
want with such a slender little fellow as I? you would not feel me
between your teeth. Come, take these two wicked girls, they are tender
morsels for you, fat as young quails; for mercy’s sake eat them!’ The
bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creature a single
blow with his paw, and he did not move again.

The girls had run away, but the bear called to them: ‘Snow-white and
Rose-red, do not be afraid; wait, I will come with you.’ Then they
recognized his voice and waited, and when he came up to them suddenly
his bearskin fell off, and he stood there a handsome man, clothed all in
gold. ‘I am a king’s son,’ he said, ‘and I was bewitched by that wicked
dwarf, who had stolen my treasures; I have had to run about the forest
as a savage bear until I was freed by his death. Now he has got his
well-deserved punishment.

Snow-white was married to him, and Rose-red to his brother, and they
divided between them the great treasure which the dwarf had gathered
together in his cave. The old mother lived peacefully and happily with
her children for many years. She took the two rose-trees with her, and
they stood before her window, and every year bore the most beautiful
roses, white and red.


*****


The Brothers Grimm, Jacob (1785-1863) and Wilhelm (1786-1859), were born
in Hanau, near Frankfurt, in the German state of Hesse. Throughout
their lives they remained close friends, and both studied law at Marburg
University. Jacob was a pioneer in the study of German philology,
and although Wilhelm’s work was hampered by poor health the brothers
collaborated in the creation of a German dictionary, not completed until
a century after their deaths. But they were best (and universally) known
for the collection of over two hundred folk tales they made from oral
sources and published in two volumes of ‘Nursery and Household Tales’ in
1812 and 1814. Although their intention was to preserve such material as
part of German cultural and literary history, and their collection was
first published with scholarly notes and no illustration, the tales soon
came into the possession of young readers. This was in part due to Edgar
Taylor, who made the first English translation in 1823, selecting about
fifty stories ‘with the amusement of some young friends principally in
view.’ They have been an essential ingredient of children’s reading ever
since.





End of Project Gutenberg’s Grimms’ Fairy Tales, by The Brothers Grimm

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRIMMS’ FAIRY TALES ***

***** This file should be named 2591-0.txt or 2591-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/9/2591/

Produced by Emma Dudding, John Bickers, and Dagny

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Grimms’ Fairy Tales, by The Brothers Grimm

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Grimms’ Fairy Tales

Author: The Brothers Grimm

Translator: Edgar Taylor and Marian Edwardes

Posting Date: December 14, 2008 [EBook #2591]
Release Date: April, 2001
Last Updated: November 7, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRIMMS’ FAIRY TALES ***




Produced by Emma Dudding, John Bickers, and Dagny





FAIRY TALES

By The Brothers Grimm



PREPARER’S NOTE

     The text is based on translations from
     the Grimms’ Kinder und Hausmarchen by
     Edgar Taylor and Marian Edwardes.




CONTENTS:

     THE GOLDEN BIRD
     HANS IN LUCK
     JORINDA AND JORINDEL
     THE TRAVELLING MUSICIANS
     OLD SULTAN
     THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND THE BEAN
     BRIAR ROSE
     THE DOG AND THE SPARROW
     THE TWELVE DANCING PRINCESSES
     THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE
     THE WILLOW-WREN AND THE BEAR
     THE FROG-PRINCE
     CAT AND MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP
     THE GOOSE-GIRL
     THE ADVENTURES OF CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET
       1. HOW THEY WENT TO THE MOUNTAINS TO EAT NUTS
       2. HOW CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET WENT TO VISIT MR KORBES
     RAPUNZEL
     FUNDEVOGEL
     THE VALIANT LITTLE TAILOR
     HANSEL AND GRETEL
     THE MOUSE, THE BIRD, AND THE SAUSAGE
     MOTHER HOLLE
     LITTLE RED-CAP [LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD]
     THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM
     TOM THUMB
     RUMPELSTILTSKIN
     CLEVER GRETEL
     THE OLD MAN AND HIS GRANDSON
     THE LITTLE PEASANT
     FREDERICK AND CATHERINE
     SWEETHEART ROLAND
     SNOWDROP
     THE PINK
     CLEVER ELSIE
     THE MISER IN THE BUSH
     ASHPUTTEL
     THE WHITE SNAKE
     THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN LITTLE KIDS
     THE QUEEN BEE
     THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER
     THE JUNIPER-TREE
     the juniper-tree.
     THE TURNIP
     CLEVER HANS
     THE THREE LANGUAGES
     THE FOX AND THE CAT
     THE FOUR CLEVER BROTHERS
     LILY AND THE LION
     THE FOX AND THE HORSE
     THE BLUE LIGHT
     THE RAVEN
     THE GOLDEN GOOSE
     THE WATER OF LIFE
     THE TWELVE HUNTSMEN
     THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN
     DOCTOR KNOWALL
     THE SEVEN RAVENS
     THE WEDDING OF MRS FOX
     FIRST STORY
     SECOND STORY
     THE SALAD
     THE STORY OF THE YOUTH WHO WENT FORTH TO LEARN WHAT FEAR WAS
     KING GRISLY-BEARD
     IRON HANS
     CAT-SKIN
     SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED




THE BROTHERS GRIMM FAIRY TALES




THE GOLDEN BIRD

A certain king had a beautiful garden, and in the garden stood a tree
which bore golden apples. These apples were always counted, and about
the time when they began to grow ripe it was found that every night one
of them was gone. The king became very angry at this, and ordered the
gardener to keep watch all night under the tree. The gardener set his
eldest son to watch; but about twelve o’clock he fell asleep, and in
the morning another of the apples was missing. Then the second son was
ordered to watch; and at midnight he too fell asleep, and in the morning
another apple was gone. Then the third son offered to keep watch; but
the gardener at first would not let him, for fear some harm should come
to him: however, at last he consented, and the young man laid himself
under the tree to watch. As the clock struck twelve he heard a rustling
noise in the air, and a bird came flying that was of pure gold; and as
it was snapping at one of the apples with its beak, the gardener’s son
jumped up and shot an arrow at it. But the arrow did the bird no harm;
only it dropped a golden feather from its tail, and then flew away.
The golden feather was brought to the king in the morning, and all the
council was called together. Everyone agreed that it was worth more than
all the wealth of the kingdom: but the king said, ‘One feather is of no
use to me, I must have the whole bird.’

Then the gardener’s eldest son set out and thought to find the golden
bird very easily; and when he had gone but a little way, he came to a
wood, and by the side of the wood he saw a fox sitting; so he took his
bow and made ready to shoot at it. Then the fox said, ‘Do not shoot me,
for I will give you good counsel; I know what your business is, and
that you want to find the golden bird. You will reach a village in the
evening; and when you get there, you will see two inns opposite to each
other, one of which is very pleasant and beautiful to look at: go not in
there, but rest for the night in the other, though it may appear to you
to be very poor and mean.’ But the son thought to himself, ‘What can
such a beast as this know about the matter?’ So he shot his arrow at
the fox; but he missed it, and it set up its tail above its back and
ran into the wood. Then he went his way, and in the evening came to
the village where the two inns were; and in one of these were people
singing, and dancing, and feasting; but the other looked very dirty,
and poor. ‘I should be very silly,’ said he, ‘if I went to that shabby
house, and left this charming place’; so he went into the smart house,
and ate and drank at his ease, and forgot the bird, and his country too.

Time passed on; and as the eldest son did not come back, and no tidings
were heard of him, the second son set out, and the same thing happened
to him. He met the fox, who gave him the good advice: but when he came
to the two inns, his eldest brother was standing at the window where
the merrymaking was, and called to him to come in; and he could not
withstand the temptation, but went in, and forgot the golden bird and
his country in the same manner.

Time passed on again, and the youngest son too wished to set out into
the wide world to seek for the golden bird; but his father would not
listen to it for a long while, for he was very fond of his son, and
was afraid that some ill luck might happen to him also, and prevent his
coming back. However, at last it was agreed he should go, for he would
not rest at home; and as he came to the wood, he met the fox, and heard
the same good counsel. But he was thankful to the fox, and did not
attempt his life as his brothers had done; so the fox said, ‘Sit upon my
tail, and you will travel faster.’ So he sat down, and the fox began to
run, and away they went over stock and stone so quick that their hair
whistled in the wind.

When they came to the village, the son followed the fox’s counsel, and
without looking about him went to the shabby inn and rested there all
night at his ease. In the morning came the fox again and met him as he
was beginning his journey, and said, ‘Go straight forward, till you come
to a castle, before which lie a whole troop of soldiers fast asleep and
snoring: take no notice of them, but go into the castle and pass on and
on till you come to a room, where the golden bird sits in a wooden cage;
close by it stands a beautiful golden cage; but do not try to take the
bird out of the shabby cage and put it into the handsome one, otherwise
you will repent it.’ Then the fox stretched out his tail again, and the
young man sat himself down, and away they went over stock and stone till
their hair whistled in the wind.

Before the castle gate all was as the fox had said: so the son went in
and found the chamber where the golden bird hung in a wooden cage, and
below stood the golden cage, and the three golden apples that had been
lost were lying close by it. Then thought he to himself, ‘It will be a
very droll thing to bring away such a fine bird in this shabby cage’; so
he opened the door and took hold of it and put it into the golden cage.
But the bird set up such a loud scream that all the soldiers awoke, and
they took him prisoner and carried him before the king. The next morning
the court sat to judge him; and when all was heard, it sentenced him to
die, unless he should bring the king the golden horse which could run as
swiftly as the wind; and if he did this, he was to have the golden bird
given him for his own.

So he set out once more on his journey, sighing, and in great despair,
when on a sudden his friend the fox met him, and said, ‘You see now
what has happened on account of your not listening to my counsel. I will
still, however, tell you how to find the golden horse, if you will do as
I bid you. You must go straight on till you come to the castle where the
horse stands in his stall: by his side will lie the groom fast asleep
and snoring: take away the horse quietly, but be sure to put the old
leathern saddle upon him, and not the golden one that is close by it.’
Then the son sat down on the fox’s tail, and away they went over stock
and stone till their hair whistled in the wind.

All went right, and the groom lay snoring with his hand upon the golden
saddle. But when the son looked at the horse, he thought it a great pity
to put the leathern saddle upon it. ‘I will give him the good one,’
said he; ‘I am sure he deserves it.’ As he took up the golden saddle the
groom awoke and cried out so loud, that all the guards ran in and took
him prisoner, and in the morning he was again brought before the court
to be judged, and was sentenced to die. But it was agreed, that, if he
could bring thither the beautiful princess, he should live, and have the
bird and the horse given him for his own.

Then he went his way very sorrowful; but the old fox came and said, ‘Why
did not you listen to me? If you had, you would have carried away
both the bird and the horse; yet will I once more give you counsel. Go
straight on, and in the evening you will arrive at a castle. At twelve
o’clock at night the princess goes to the bathing-house: go up to her
and give her a kiss, and she will let you lead her away; but take care
you do not suffer her to go and take leave of her father and mother.’
Then the fox stretched out his tail, and so away they went over stock
and stone till their hair whistled again.

As they came to the castle, all was as the fox had said, and at twelve
o’clock the young man met the princess going to the bath and gave her the
kiss, and she agreed to run away with him, but begged with many tears
that he would let her take leave of her father. At first he refused,
but she wept still more and more, and fell at his feet, till at last
he consented; but the moment she came to her father’s house the guards
awoke and he was taken prisoner again.

Then he was brought before the king, and the king said, ‘You shall never
have my daughter unless in eight days you dig away the hill that stops
the view from my window.’ Now this hill was so big that the whole world
could not take it away: and when he had worked for seven days, and had
done very little, the fox came and said. ‘Lie down and go to sleep; I
will work for you.’ And in the morning he awoke and the hill was gone;
so he went merrily to the king, and told him that now that it was
removed he must give him the princess.

Then the king was obliged to keep his word, and away went the young man
and the princess; and the fox came and said to him, ‘We will have all
three, the princess, the horse, and the bird.’ ‘Ah!’ said the young man,
‘that would be a great thing, but how can you contrive it?’

‘If you will only listen,’ said the fox, ‘it can be done. When you come
to the king, and he asks for the beautiful princess, you must say, “Here
she is!” Then he will be very joyful; and you will mount the golden
horse that they are to give you, and put out your hand to take leave of
them; but shake hands with the princess last. Then lift her quickly on
to the horse behind you; clap your spurs to his side, and gallop away as
fast as you can.’

All went right: then the fox said, ‘When you come to the castle where
the bird is, I will stay with the princess at the door, and you will
ride in and speak to the king; and when he sees that it is the right
horse, he will bring out the bird; but you must sit still, and say that
you want to look at it, to see whether it is the true golden bird; and
when you get it into your hand, ride away.’

This, too, happened as the fox said; they carried off the bird, the
princess mounted again, and they rode on to a great wood. Then the fox
came, and said, ‘Pray kill me, and cut off my head and my feet.’ But the
young man refused to do it: so the fox said, ‘I will at any rate give
you good counsel: beware of two things; ransom no one from the gallows,
and sit down by the side of no river.’ Then away he went. ‘Well,’
thought the young man, ‘it is no hard matter to keep that advice.’

He rode on with the princess, till at last he came to the village where
he had left his two brothers. And there he heard a great noise and
uproar; and when he asked what was the matter, the people said, ‘Two men
are going to be hanged.’ As he came nearer, he saw that the two men were
his brothers, who had turned robbers; so he said, ‘Cannot they in any
way be saved?’ But the people said ‘No,’ unless he would bestow all his
money upon the rascals and buy their liberty. Then he did not stay to
think about the matter, but paid what was asked, and his brothers were
given up, and went on with him towards their home.

And as they came to the wood where the fox first met them, it was so
cool and pleasant that the two brothers said, ‘Let us sit down by the
side of the river, and rest a while, to eat and drink.’ So he said,
‘Yes,’ and forgot the fox’s counsel, and sat down on the side of the
river; and while he suspected nothing, they came behind, and threw him
down the bank, and took the princess, the horse, and the bird, and went
home to the king their master, and said. ‘All this have we won by our
labour.’ Then there was great rejoicing made; but the horse would not
eat, the bird would not sing, and the princess wept.

The youngest son fell to the bottom of the river’s bed: luckily it was
nearly dry, but his bones were almost broken, and the bank was so steep
that he could find no way to get out. Then the old fox came once more,
and scolded him for not following his advice; otherwise no evil would
have befallen him: ‘Yet,’ said he, ‘I cannot leave you here, so lay hold
of my tail and hold fast.’ Then he pulled him out of the river, and said
to him, as he got upon the bank, ‘Your brothers have set watch to kill
you, if they find you in the kingdom.’ So he dressed himself as a poor
man, and came secretly to the king’s court, and was scarcely within the
doors when the horse began to eat, and the bird to sing, and the princess
left off weeping. Then he went to the king, and told him all his
brothers’ roguery; and they were seized and punished, and he had the
princess given to him again; and after the king’s death he was heir to
his kingdom.

A long while after, he went to walk one day in the wood, and the old fox
met him, and besought him with tears in his eyes to kill him, and cut
off his head and feet. And at last he did so, and in a moment the
fox was changed into a man, and turned out to be the brother of the
princess, who had been lost a great many many years.




HANS IN LUCK

Some men are born to good luck: all they do or try to do comes
right--all that falls to them is so much gain--all their geese are
swans--all their cards are trumps--toss them which way you will, they
will always, like poor puss, alight upon their legs, and only move on so
much the faster. The world may very likely not always think of them as
they think of themselves, but what care they for the world? what can it
know about the matter?

One of these lucky beings was neighbour Hans. Seven long years he had
worked hard for his master. At last he said, ‘Master, my time is up; I
must go home and see my poor mother once more: so pray pay me my wages
and let me go.’ And the master said, ‘You have been a faithful and good
servant, Hans, so your pay shall be handsome.’ Then he gave him a lump
of silver as big as his head.

Hans took out his pocket-handkerchief, put the piece of silver into it,
threw it over his shoulder, and jogged off on his road homewards. As he
went lazily on, dragging one foot after another, a man came in sight,
trotting gaily along on a capital horse. ‘Ah!’ said Hans aloud, ‘what a
fine thing it is to ride on horseback! There he sits as easy and happy
as if he was at home, in the chair by his fireside; he trips against no
stones, saves shoe-leather, and gets on he hardly knows how.’ Hans did
not speak so softly but the horseman heard it all, and said, ‘Well,
friend, why do you go on foot then?’ ‘Ah!’ said he, ‘I have this load to
carry: to be sure it is silver, but it is so heavy that I can’t hold up
my head, and you must know it hurts my shoulder sadly.’ ‘What do you say
of making an exchange?’ said the horseman. ‘I will give you my horse,
and you shall give me the silver; which will save you a great deal of
trouble in carrying such a heavy load about with you.’ ‘With all my
heart,’ said Hans: ‘but as you are so kind to me, I must tell you one
thing--you will have a weary task to draw that silver about with you.’
However, the horseman got off, took the silver, helped Hans up, gave him
the bridle into one hand and the whip into the other, and said, ‘When
you want to go very fast, smack your lips loudly together, and cry
“Jip!”’

Hans was delighted as he sat on the horse, drew himself up, squared his
elbows, turned out his toes, cracked his whip, and rode merrily off, one
minute whistling a merry tune, and another singing,

 ‘No care and no sorrow,
  A fig for the morrow!
  We’ll laugh and be merry,
  Sing neigh down derry!’

After a time he thought he should like to go a little faster, so he
smacked his lips and cried ‘Jip!’ Away went the horse full gallop; and
before Hans knew what he was about, he was thrown off, and lay on his
back by the road-side. His horse would have ran off, if a shepherd who
was coming by, driving a cow, had not stopped it. Hans soon came to
himself, and got upon his legs again, sadly vexed, and said to the
shepherd, ‘This riding is no joke, when a man has the luck to get upon
a beast like this that stumbles and flings him off as if it would break
his neck. However, I’m off now once for all: I like your cow now a great
deal better than this smart beast that played me this trick, and has
spoiled my best coat, you see, in this puddle; which, by the by, smells
not very like a nosegay. One can walk along at one’s leisure behind that
cow--keep good company, and have milk, butter, and cheese, every day,
into the bargain. What would I give to have such a prize!’ ‘Well,’ said
the shepherd, ‘if you are so fond of her, I will change my cow for your
horse; I like to do good to my neighbours, even though I lose by it
myself.’ ‘Done!’ said Hans, merrily. ‘What a noble heart that good man
has!’ thought he. Then the shepherd jumped upon the horse, wished Hans
and the cow good morning, and away he rode.

Hans brushed his coat, wiped his face and hands, rested a while, and
then drove off his cow quietly, and thought his bargain a very lucky
one. ‘If I have only a piece of bread (and I certainly shall always be
able to get that), I can, whenever I like, eat my butter and cheese with
it; and when I am thirsty I can milk my cow and drink the milk: and what
can I wish for more?’ When he came to an inn, he halted, ate up all his
bread, and gave away his last penny for a glass of beer. When he had
rested himself he set off again, driving his cow towards his mother’s
village. But the heat grew greater as soon as noon came on, till at
last, as he found himself on a wide heath that would take him more than
an hour to cross, he began to be so hot and parched that his tongue
clave to the roof of his mouth. ‘I can find a cure for this,’ thought
he; ‘now I will milk my cow and quench my thirst’: so he tied her to the
stump of a tree, and held his leathern cap to milk into; but not a drop
was to be had. Who would have thought that this cow, which was to bring
him milk and butter and cheese, was all that time utterly dry? Hans had
not thought of looking to that.

While he was trying his luck in milking, and managing the matter very
clumsily, the uneasy beast began to think him very troublesome; and at
last gave him such a kick on the head as knocked him down; and there he
lay a long while senseless. Luckily a butcher soon came by, driving a
pig in a wheelbarrow. ‘What is the matter with you, my man?’ said the
butcher, as he helped him up. Hans told him what had happened, how he
was dry, and wanted to milk his cow, but found the cow was dry too. Then
the butcher gave him a flask of ale, saying, ‘There, drink and refresh
yourself; your cow will give you no milk: don’t you see she is an old
beast, good for nothing but the slaughter-house?’ ‘Alas, alas!’ said
Hans, ‘who would have thought it? What a shame to take my horse, and
give me only a dry cow! If I kill her, what will she be good for? I hate
cow-beef; it is not tender enough for me. If it were a pig now--like
that fat gentleman you are driving along at his ease--one could do
something with it; it would at any rate make sausages.’ ‘Well,’ said
the butcher, ‘I don’t like to say no, when one is asked to do a kind,
neighbourly thing. To please you I will change, and give you my fine fat
pig for the cow.’ ‘Heaven reward you for your kindness and self-denial!’
said Hans, as he gave the butcher the cow; and taking the pig off the
wheel-barrow, drove it away, holding it by the string that was tied to
its leg.

So on he jogged, and all seemed now to go right with him: he had met
with some misfortunes, to be sure; but he was now well repaid for all.
How could it be otherwise with such a travelling companion as he had at
last got?

The next man he met was a countryman carrying a fine white goose. The
countryman stopped to ask what was o’clock; this led to further chat;
and Hans told him all his luck, how he had so many good bargains, and
how all the world went gay and smiling with him. The countryman then
began to tell his tale, and said he was going to take the goose to a
christening. ‘Feel,’ said he, ‘how heavy it is, and yet it is only eight
weeks old. Whoever roasts and eats it will find plenty of fat upon it,
it has lived so well!’ ‘You’re right,’ said Hans, as he weighed it in
his hand; ‘but if you talk of fat, my pig is no trifle.’ Meantime the
countryman began to look grave, and shook his head. ‘Hark ye!’ said he,
‘my worthy friend, you seem a good sort of fellow, so I can’t help doing
you a kind turn. Your pig may get you into a scrape. In the village I
just came from, the squire has had a pig stolen out of his sty. I was
dreadfully afraid when I saw you that you had got the squire’s pig. If
you have, and they catch you, it will be a bad job for you. The least
they will do will be to throw you into the horse-pond. Can you swim?’

Poor Hans was sadly frightened. ‘Good man,’ cried he, ‘pray get me out
of this scrape. I know nothing of where the pig was either bred or born;
but he may have been the squire’s for aught I can tell: you know this
country better than I do, take my pig and give me the goose.’ ‘I ought
to have something into the bargain,’ said the countryman; ‘give a fat
goose for a pig, indeed! ‘Tis not everyone would do so much for you as
that. However, I will not be hard upon you, as you are in trouble.’ Then
he took the string in his hand, and drove off the pig by a side path;
while Hans went on the way homewards free from care. ‘After all,’
thought he, ‘that chap is pretty well taken in. I don’t care whose pig
it is, but wherever it came from it has been a very good friend to me. I
have much the best of the bargain. First there will be a capital roast;
then the fat will find me in goose-grease for six months; and then there
are all the beautiful white feathers. I will put them into my pillow,
and then I am sure I shall sleep soundly without rocking. How happy my
mother will be! Talk of a pig, indeed! Give me a fine fat goose.’

As he came to the next village, he saw a scissor-grinder with his wheel,
working and singing,

 ‘O’er hill and o’er dale
  So happy I roam,
  Work light and live well,
  All the world is my home;
  Then who so blythe, so merry as I?’

Hans stood looking on for a while, and at last said, ‘You must be well
off, master grinder! you seem so happy at your work.’ ‘Yes,’ said the
other, ‘mine is a golden trade; a good grinder never puts his hand
into his pocket without finding money in it--but where did you get that
beautiful goose?’ ‘I did not buy it, I gave a pig for it.’ ‘And where
did you get the pig?’ ‘I gave a cow for it.’ ‘And the cow?’ ‘I gave a
horse for it.’ ‘And the horse?’ ‘I gave a lump of silver as big as my
head for it.’ ‘And the silver?’ ‘Oh! I worked hard for that seven long
years.’ ‘You have thriven well in the world hitherto,’ said the grinder,
‘now if you could find money in your pocket whenever you put your hand
in it, your fortune would be made.’ ‘Very true: but how is that to be
managed?’ ‘How? Why, you must turn grinder like myself,’ said the other;
‘you only want a grindstone; the rest will come of itself. Here is one
that is but little the worse for wear: I would not ask more than the
value of your goose for it--will you buy?’ ‘How can you ask?’ said
Hans; ‘I should be the happiest man in the world, if I could have money
whenever I put my hand in my pocket: what could I want more? there’s
the goose.’ ‘Now,’ said the grinder, as he gave him a common rough stone
that lay by his side, ‘this is a most capital stone; do but work it well
enough, and you can make an old nail cut with it.’

Hans took the stone, and went his way with a light heart: his eyes
sparkled for joy, and he said to himself, ‘Surely I must have been born
in a lucky hour; everything I could want or wish for comes of itself.
People are so kind; they seem really to think I do them a favour in
letting them make me rich, and giving me good bargains.’

Meantime he began to be tired, and hungry too, for he had given away his
last penny in his joy at getting the cow.

At last he could go no farther, for the stone tired him sadly: and he
dragged himself to the side of a river, that he might take a drink of
water, and rest a while. So he laid the stone carefully by his side on
the bank: but, as he stooped down to drink, he forgot it, pushed it a
little, and down it rolled, plump into the stream.

For a while he watched it sinking in the deep clear water; then sprang
up and danced for joy, and again fell upon his knees and thanked Heaven,
with tears in his eyes, for its kindness in taking away his only plague,
the ugly heavy stone.

‘How happy am I!’ cried he; ‘nobody was ever so lucky as I.’ Then up he
got with a light heart, free from all his troubles, and walked on till
he reached his mother’s house, and told her how very easy the road to
good luck was.




JORINDA AND JORINDEL

There was once an old castle, that stood in the middle of a deep gloomy
wood, and in the castle lived an old fairy. Now this fairy could take
any shape she pleased. All the day long she flew about in the form of
an owl, or crept about the country like a cat; but at night she always
became an old woman again. When any young man came within a hundred
paces of her castle, he became quite fixed, and could not move a step
till she came and set him free; which she would not do till he had given
her his word never to come there again: but when any pretty maiden came
within that space she was changed into a bird, and the fairy put her
into a cage, and hung her up in a chamber in the castle. There were
seven hundred of these cages hanging in the castle, and all with
beautiful birds in them.

Now there was once a maiden whose name was Jorinda. She was prettier
than all the pretty girls that ever were seen before, and a shepherd
lad, whose name was Jorindel, was very fond of her, and they were soon
to be married. One day they went to walk in the wood, that they might be
alone; and Jorindel said, ‘We must take care that we don’t go too near
to the fairy’s castle.’ It was a beautiful evening; the last rays of the
setting sun shone bright through the long stems of the trees upon
the green underwood beneath, and the turtle-doves sang from the tall
birches.

Jorinda sat down to gaze upon the sun; Jorindel sat by her side; and
both felt sad, they knew not why; but it seemed as if they were to be
parted from one another for ever. They had wandered a long way; and when
they looked to see which way they should go home, they found themselves
at a loss to know what path to take.

The sun was setting fast, and already half of its circle had sunk behind
the hill: Jorindel on a sudden looked behind him, and saw through the
bushes that they had, without knowing it, sat down close under the old
walls of the castle. Then he shrank for fear, turned pale, and trembled.
Jorinda was just singing,

 ‘The ring-dove sang from the willow spray,
  Well-a-day! Well-a-day!
  He mourn’d for the fate of his darling mate,
  Well-a-day!’

when her song stopped suddenly. Jorindel turned to see the reason, and
beheld his Jorinda changed into a nightingale, so that her song ended
with a mournful _jug, jug_. An owl with fiery eyes flew three times
round them, and three times screamed:

 ‘Tu whu! Tu whu! Tu whu!’

Jorindel could not move; he stood fixed as a stone, and could neither
weep, nor speak, nor stir hand or foot. And now the sun went quite down;
the gloomy night came; the owl flew into a bush; and a moment after the
old fairy came forth pale and meagre, with staring eyes, and a nose and
chin that almost met one another.

She mumbled something to herself, seized the nightingale, and went away
with it in her hand. Poor Jorindel saw the nightingale was gone--but
what could he do? He could not speak, he could not move from the spot
where he stood. At last the fairy came back and sang with a hoarse
voice:

 ‘Till the prisoner is fast,
  And her doom is cast,
  There stay! Oh, stay!
  When the charm is around her,
  And the spell has bound her,
  Hie away! away!’

On a sudden Jorindel found himself free. Then he fell on his knees
before the fairy, and prayed her to give him back his dear Jorinda: but
she laughed at him, and said he should never see her again; then she
went her way.

He prayed, he wept, he sorrowed, but all in vain. ‘Alas!’ he said, ‘what
will become of me?’ He could not go back to his own home, so he went to
a strange village, and employed himself in keeping sheep. Many a time
did he walk round and round as near to the hated castle as he dared go,
but all in vain; he heard or saw nothing of Jorinda.

At last he dreamt one night that he found a beautiful purple flower,
and that in the middle of it lay a costly pearl; and he dreamt that he
plucked the flower, and went with it in his hand into the castle, and
that everything he touched with it was disenchanted, and that there he
found his Jorinda again.

In the morning when he awoke, he began to search over hill and dale for
this pretty flower; and eight long days he sought for it in vain: but
on the ninth day, early in the morning, he found the beautiful purple
flower; and in the middle of it was a large dewdrop, as big as a costly
pearl. Then he plucked the flower, and set out and travelled day and
night, till he came again to the castle.

He walked nearer than a hundred paces to it, and yet he did not become
fixed as before, but found that he could go quite close up to the door.
Jorindel was very glad indeed to see this. Then he touched the door with
the flower, and it sprang open; so that he went in through the court,
and listened when he heard so many birds singing. At last he came to the
chamber where the fairy sat, with the seven hundred birds singing in
the seven hundred cages. When she saw Jorindel she was very angry, and
screamed with rage; but she could not come within two yards of him, for
the flower he held in his hand was his safeguard. He looked around at
the birds, but alas! there were many, many nightingales, and how then
should he find out which was his Jorinda? While he was thinking what to
do, he saw the fairy had taken down one of the cages, and was making the
best of her way off through the door. He ran or flew after her, touched
the cage with the flower, and Jorinda stood before him, and threw her
arms round his neck looking as beautiful as ever, as beautiful as when
they walked together in the wood.

Then he touched all the other birds with the flower, so that they all
took their old forms again; and he took Jorinda home, where they were
married, and lived happily together many years: and so did a good many
other lads, whose maidens had been forced to sing in the old fairy’s
cages by themselves, much longer than they liked.




THE TRAVELLING MUSICIANS

An honest farmer had once an ass that had been a faithful servant to him
a great many years, but was now growing old and every day more and more
unfit for work. His master therefore was tired of keeping him and
began to think of putting an end to him; but the ass, who saw that some
mischief was in the wind, took himself slyly off, and began his journey
towards the great city, ‘For there,’ thought he, ‘I may turn musician.’

After he had travelled a little way, he spied a dog lying by the
roadside and panting as if he were tired. ‘What makes you pant so, my
friend?’ said the ass. ‘Alas!’ said the dog, ‘my master was going to
knock me on the head, because I am old and weak, and can no longer make
myself useful to him in hunting; so I ran away; but what can I do to
earn my livelihood?’ ‘Hark ye!’ said the ass, ‘I am going to the great
city to turn musician: suppose you go with me, and try what you can
do in the same way?’ The dog said he was willing, and they jogged on
together.

They had not gone far before they saw a cat sitting in the middle of the
road and making a most rueful face. ‘Pray, my good lady,’ said the ass,
‘what’s the matter with you? You look quite out of spirits!’ ‘Ah, me!’
said the cat, ‘how can one be in good spirits when one’s life is in
danger? Because I am beginning to grow old, and had rather lie at my
ease by the fire than run about the house after the mice, my mistress
laid hold of me, and was going to drown me; and though I have been lucky
enough to get away from her, I do not know what I am to live upon.’
‘Oh,’ said the ass, ‘by all means go with us to the great city; you are
a good night singer, and may make your fortune as a musician.’ The cat
was pleased with the thought, and joined the party.

Soon afterwards, as they were passing by a farmyard, they saw a cock
perched upon a gate, and screaming out with all his might and main.
‘Bravo!’ said the ass; ‘upon my word, you make a famous noise; pray what
is all this about?’ ‘Why,’ said the cock, ‘I was just now saying that
we should have fine weather for our washing-day, and yet my mistress and
the cook don’t thank me for my pains, but threaten to cut off my
head tomorrow, and make broth of me for the guests that are coming
on Sunday!’ ‘Heaven forbid!’ said the ass, ‘come with us Master
Chanticleer; it will be better, at any rate, than staying here to have
your head cut off! Besides, who knows? If we care to sing in tune, we
may get up some kind of a concert; so come along with us.’ ‘With all my
heart,’ said the cock: so they all four went on jollily together.

They could not, however, reach the great city the first day; so when
night came on, they went into a wood to sleep. The ass and the dog laid
themselves down under a great tree, and the cat climbed up into the
branches; while the cock, thinking that the higher he sat the safer he
should be, flew up to the very top of the tree, and then, according to
his custom, before he went to sleep, looked out on all sides of him to
see that everything was well. In doing this, he saw afar off something
bright and shining and calling to his companions said, ‘There must be a
house no great way off, for I see a light.’ ‘If that be the case,’ said
the ass, ‘we had better change our quarters, for our lodging is not the
best in the world!’ ‘Besides,’ added the dog, ‘I should not be the
worse for a bone or two, or a bit of meat.’ So they walked off together
towards the spot where Chanticleer had seen the light, and as they drew
near it became larger and brighter, till they at last came close to a
house in which a gang of robbers lived.

The ass, being the tallest of the company, marched up to the window and
peeped in. ‘Well, Donkey,’ said Chanticleer, ‘what do you see?’ ‘What
do I see?’ replied the ass. ‘Why, I see a table spread with all kinds of
good things, and robbers sitting round it making merry.’ ‘That would
be a noble lodging for us,’ said the cock. ‘Yes,’ said the ass, ‘if we
could only get in’; so they consulted together how they should contrive
to get the robbers out; and at last they hit upon a plan. The ass placed
himself upright on his hind legs, with his forefeet resting against the
window; the dog got upon his back; the cat scrambled up to the dog’s
shoulders, and the cock flew up and sat upon the cat’s head. When
all was ready a signal was given, and they began their music. The ass
brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock screamed; and then
they all broke through the window at once, and came tumbling into
the room, amongst the broken glass, with a most hideous clatter! The
robbers, who had been not a little frightened by the opening concert,
had now no doubt that some frightful hobgoblin had broken in upon them,
and scampered away as fast as they could.

The coast once clear, our travellers soon sat down and dispatched what
the robbers had left, with as much eagerness as if they had not expected
to eat again for a month. As soon as they had satisfied themselves, they
put out the lights, and each once more sought out a resting-place to
his own liking. The donkey laid himself down upon a heap of straw in
the yard, the dog stretched himself upon a mat behind the door, the
cat rolled herself up on the hearth before the warm ashes, and the
cock perched upon a beam on the top of the house; and, as they were all
rather tired with their journey, they soon fell asleep.

But about midnight, when the robbers saw from afar that the lights were
out and that all seemed quiet, they began to think that they had been in
too great a hurry to run away; and one of them, who was bolder than
the rest, went to see what was going on. Finding everything still, he
marched into the kitchen, and groped about till he found a match in
order to light a candle; and then, espying the glittering fiery eyes of
the cat, he mistook them for live coals, and held the match to them to
light it. But the cat, not understanding this joke, sprang at his face,
and spat, and scratched at him. This frightened him dreadfully, and away
he ran to the back door; but there the dog jumped up and bit him in the
leg; and as he was crossing over the yard the ass kicked him; and the
cock, who had been awakened by the noise, crowed with all his might. At
this the robber ran back as fast as he could to his comrades, and told
the captain how a horrid witch had got into the house, and had spat at
him and scratched his face with her long bony fingers; how a man with a
knife in his hand had hidden himself behind the door, and stabbed him
in the leg; how a black monster stood in the yard and struck him with a
club, and how the devil had sat upon the top of the house and cried out,
‘Throw the rascal up here!’ After this the robbers never dared to go
back to the house; but the musicians were so pleased with their quarters
that they took up their abode there; and there they are, I dare say, at
this very day.




OLD SULTAN

A shepherd had a faithful dog, called Sultan, who was grown very old,
and had lost all his teeth. And one day when the shepherd and his wife
were standing together before the house the shepherd said, ‘I will shoot
old Sultan tomorrow morning, for he is of no use now.’ But his wife
said, ‘Pray let the poor faithful creature live; he has served us well a
great many years, and we ought to give him a livelihood for the rest of
his days.’ ‘But what can we do with him?’ said the shepherd, ‘he has not
a tooth in his head, and the thieves don’t care for him at all; to
be sure he has served us, but then he did it to earn his livelihood;
tomorrow shall be his last day, depend upon it.’

Poor Sultan, who was lying close by them, heard all that the shepherd
and his wife said to one another, and was very much frightened to think
tomorrow would be his last day; so in the evening he went to his good
friend the wolf, who lived in the wood, and told him all his sorrows,
and how his master meant to kill him in the morning. ‘Make yourself
easy,’ said the wolf, ‘I will give you some good advice. Your master,
you know, goes out every morning very early with his wife into the
field; and they take their little child with them, and lay it down
behind the hedge in the shade while they are at work. Now do you lie
down close by the child, and pretend to be watching it, and I will come
out of the wood and run away with it; you must run after me as fast as
you can, and I will let it drop; then you may carry it back, and they
will think you have saved their child, and will be so thankful to you
that they will take care of you as long as you live.’ The dog liked this
plan very well; and accordingly so it was managed. The wolf ran with the
child a little way; the shepherd and his wife screamed out; but Sultan
soon overtook him, and carried the poor little thing back to his master
and mistress. Then the shepherd patted him on the head, and said, ‘Old
Sultan has saved our child from the wolf, and therefore he shall live
and be well taken care of, and have plenty to eat. Wife, go home, and
give him a good dinner, and let him have my old cushion to sleep on
as long as he lives.’ So from this time forward Sultan had all that he
could wish for.

Soon afterwards the wolf came and wished him joy, and said, ‘Now, my
good fellow, you must tell no tales, but turn your head the other way
when I want to taste one of the old shepherd’s fine fat sheep.’ ‘No,’
said the Sultan; ‘I will be true to my master.’ However, the wolf
thought he was in joke, and came one night to get a dainty morsel. But
Sultan had told his master what the wolf meant to do; so he laid wait
for him behind the barn door, and when the wolf was busy looking out for
a good fat sheep, he had a stout cudgel laid about his back, that combed
his locks for him finely.

Then the wolf was very angry, and called Sultan ‘an old rogue,’ and
swore he would have his revenge. So the next morning the wolf sent the
boar to challenge Sultan to come into the wood to fight the matter. Now
Sultan had nobody he could ask to be his second but the shepherd’s old
three-legged cat; so he took her with him, and as the poor thing limped
along with some trouble, she stuck up her tail straight in the air.

The wolf and the wild boar were first on the ground; and when they
espied their enemies coming, and saw the cat’s long tail standing
straight in the air, they thought she was carrying a sword for Sultan to
fight with; and every time she limped, they thought she was picking up
a stone to throw at them; so they said they should not like this way of
fighting, and the boar lay down behind a bush, and the wolf jumped
up into a tree. Sultan and the cat soon came up, and looked about and
wondered that no one was there. The boar, however, had not quite hidden
himself, for his ears stuck out of the bush; and when he shook one of
them a little, the cat, seeing something move, and thinking it was a
mouse, sprang upon it, and bit and scratched it, so that the boar jumped
up and grunted, and ran away, roaring out, ‘Look up in the tree, there
sits the one who is to blame.’ So they looked up, and espied the wolf
sitting amongst the branches; and they called him a cowardly rascal,
and would not suffer him to come down till he was heartily ashamed of
himself, and had promised to be good friends again with old Sultan.




THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND THE BEAN

In a village dwelt a poor old woman, who had gathered together a dish
of beans and wanted to cook them. So she made a fire on her hearth, and
that it might burn the quicker, she lighted it with a handful of straw.
When she was emptying the beans into the pan, one dropped without her
observing it, and lay on the ground beside a straw, and soon afterwards
a burning coal from the fire leapt down to the two. Then the straw
began and said: ‘Dear friends, from whence do you come here?’ The coal
replied: ‘I fortunately sprang out of the fire, and if I had not escaped
by sheer force, my death would have been certain,--I should have been
burnt to ashes.’ The bean said: ‘I too have escaped with a whole skin,
but if the old woman had got me into the pan, I should have been made
into broth without any mercy, like my comrades.’ ‘And would a better
fate have fallen to my lot?’ said the straw. ‘The old woman has
destroyed all my brethren in fire and smoke; she seized sixty of them at
once, and took their lives. I luckily slipped through her fingers.’

‘But what are we to do now?’ said the coal.

‘I think,’ answered the bean, ‘that as we have so fortunately escaped
death, we should keep together like good companions, and lest a new
mischance should overtake us here, we should go away together, and
repair to a foreign country.’

The proposition pleased the two others, and they set out on their way
together. Soon, however, they came to a little brook, and as there was
no bridge or foot-plank, they did not know how they were to get over
it. The straw hit on a good idea, and said: ‘I will lay myself straight
across, and then you can walk over on me as on a bridge.’ The straw
therefore stretched itself from one bank to the other, and the coal,
who was of an impetuous disposition, tripped quite boldly on to the
newly-built bridge. But when she had reached the middle, and heard the
water rushing beneath her, she was after all, afraid, and stood still,
and ventured no farther. The straw, however, began to burn, broke in
two pieces, and fell into the stream. The coal slipped after her, hissed
when she got into the water, and breathed her last. The bean, who had
prudently stayed behind on the shore, could not but laugh at the event,
was unable to stop, and laughed so heartily that she burst. It would
have been all over with her, likewise, if, by good fortune, a tailor who
was travelling in search of work, had not sat down to rest by the brook.
As he had a compassionate heart he pulled out his needle and thread,
and sewed her together. The bean thanked him most prettily, but as the
tailor used black thread, all beans since then have a black seam.




BRIAR ROSE

A king and queen once upon a time reigned in a country a great way off,
where there were in those days fairies. Now this king and queen had
plenty of money, and plenty of fine clothes to wear, and plenty of
good things to eat and drink, and a coach to ride out in every day: but
though they had been married many years they had no children, and this
grieved them very much indeed. But one day as the queen was walking
by the side of the river, at the bottom of the garden, she saw a poor
little fish, that had thrown itself out of the water, and lay gasping
and nearly dead on the bank. Then the queen took pity on the little
fish, and threw it back again into the river; and before it swam away
it lifted its head out of the water and said, ‘I know what your wish is,
and it shall be fulfilled, in return for your kindness to me--you will
soon have a daughter.’ What the little fish had foretold soon came to
pass; and the queen had a little girl, so very beautiful that the king
could not cease looking on it for joy, and said he would hold a great
feast and make merry, and show the child to all the land. So he asked
his kinsmen, and nobles, and friends, and neighbours. But the queen
said, ‘I will have the fairies also, that they might be kind and good
to our little daughter.’ Now there were thirteen fairies in the kingdom;
but as the king and queen had only twelve golden dishes for them to eat
out of, they were forced to leave one of the fairies without asking her.
So twelve fairies came, each with a high red cap on her head, and red
shoes with high heels on her feet, and a long white wand in her hand:
and after the feast was over they gathered round in a ring and gave all
their best gifts to the little princess. One gave her goodness, another
beauty, another riches, and so on till she had all that was good in the
world.

Just as eleven of them had done blessing her, a great noise was heard in
the courtyard, and word was brought that the thirteenth fairy was
come, with a black cap on her head, and black shoes on her feet, and a
broomstick in her hand: and presently up she came into the dining-hall.
Now, as she had not been asked to the feast she was very angry, and
scolded the king and queen very much, and set to work to take her
revenge. So she cried out, ‘The king’s daughter shall, in her fifteenth
year, be wounded by a spindle, and fall down dead.’ Then the twelfth of
the friendly fairies, who had not yet given her gift, came forward, and
said that the evil wish must be fulfilled, but that she could soften its
mischief; so her gift was, that the king’s daughter, when the spindle
wounded her, should not really die, but should only fall asleep for a
hundred years.

However, the king hoped still to save his dear child altogether from
the threatened evil; so he ordered that all the spindles in the kingdom
should be bought up and burnt. But all the gifts of the first eleven
fairies were in the meantime fulfilled; for the princess was so
beautiful, and well behaved, and good, and wise, that everyone who knew
her loved her.

It happened that, on the very day she was fifteen years old, the king
and queen were not at home, and she was left alone in the palace. So she
roved about by herself, and looked at all the rooms and chambers, till
at last she came to an old tower, to which there was a narrow staircase
ending with a little door. In the door there was a golden key, and when
she turned it the door sprang open, and there sat an old lady spinning
away very busily. ‘Why, how now, good mother,’ said the princess; ‘what
are you doing there?’ ‘Spinning,’ said the old lady, and nodded her
head, humming a tune, while buzz! went the wheel. ‘How prettily that
little thing turns round!’ said the princess, and took the spindle
and began to try and spin. But scarcely had she touched it, before the
fairy’s prophecy was fulfilled; the spindle wounded her, and she fell
down lifeless on the ground.

However, she was not dead, but had only fallen into a deep sleep; and
the king and the queen, who had just come home, and all their court,
fell asleep too; and the horses slept in the stables, and the dogs in
the court, the pigeons on the house-top, and the very flies slept upon
the walls. Even the fire on the hearth left off blazing, and went to
sleep; the jack stopped, and the spit that was turning about with a
goose upon it for the king’s dinner stood still; and the cook, who was
at that moment pulling the kitchen-boy by the hair to give him a box
on the ear for something he had done amiss, let him go, and both fell
asleep; the butler, who was slyly tasting the ale, fell asleep with the
jug at his lips: and thus everything stood still, and slept soundly.

A large hedge of thorns soon grew round the palace, and every year it
became higher and thicker; till at last the old palace was surrounded
and hidden, so that not even the roof or the chimneys could be seen. But
there went a report through all the land of the beautiful sleeping Briar
Rose (for so the king’s daughter was called): so that, from time to
time, several kings’ sons came, and tried to break through the thicket
into the palace. This, however, none of them could ever do; for the
thorns and bushes laid hold of them, as it were with hands; and there
they stuck fast, and died wretchedly.

After many, many years there came a king’s son into that land: and an
old man told him the story of the thicket of thorns; and how a beautiful
palace stood behind it, and how a wonderful princess, called Briar Rose,
lay in it asleep, with all her court. He told, too, how he had heard
from his grandfather that many, many princes had come, and had tried to
break through the thicket, but that they had all stuck fast in it, and
died. Then the young prince said, ‘All this shall not frighten me; I
will go and see this Briar Rose.’ The old man tried to hinder him, but
he was bent upon going.

Now that very day the hundred years were ended; and as the prince came
to the thicket he saw nothing but beautiful flowering shrubs, through
which he went with ease, and they shut in after him as thick as ever.
Then he came at last to the palace, and there in the court lay the dogs
asleep; and the horses were standing in the stables; and on the roof sat
the pigeons fast asleep, with their heads under their wings. And when he
came into the palace, the flies were sleeping on the walls; the spit
was standing still; the butler had the jug of ale at his lips, going
to drink a draught; the maid sat with a fowl in her lap ready to be
plucked; and the cook in the kitchen was still holding up her hand, as
if she was going to beat the boy.

Then he went on still farther, and all was so still that he could hear
every breath he drew; till at last he came to the old tower, and opened
the door of the little room in which Briar Rose was; and there she lay,
fast asleep on a couch by the window. She looked so beautiful that he
could not take his eyes off her, so he stooped down and gave her a kiss.
But the moment he kissed her she opened her eyes and awoke, and smiled
upon him; and they went out together; and soon the king and queen also
awoke, and all the court, and gazed on each other with great wonder.
And the horses shook themselves, and the dogs jumped up and barked; the
pigeons took their heads from under their wings, and looked about and
flew into the fields; the flies on the walls buzzed again; the fire in
the kitchen blazed up; round went the jack, and round went the spit,
with the goose for the king’s dinner upon it; the butler finished his
draught of ale; the maid went on plucking the fowl; and the cook gave
the boy the box on his ear.

And then the prince and Briar Rose were married, and the wedding feast
was given; and they lived happily together all their lives long.




THE DOG AND THE SPARROW

A shepherd’s dog had a master who took no care of him, but often let him
suffer the greatest hunger. At last he could bear it no longer; so he
took to his heels, and off he ran in a very sad and sorrowful mood.
On the road he met a sparrow that said to him, ‘Why are you so sad,
my friend?’ ‘Because,’ said the dog, ‘I am very very hungry, and have
nothing to eat.’ ‘If that be all,’ answered the sparrow, ‘come with me
into the next town, and I will soon find you plenty of food.’ So on they
went together into the town: and as they passed by a butcher’s shop,
the sparrow said to the dog, ‘Stand there a little while till I peck you
down a piece of meat.’ So the sparrow perched upon the shelf: and having
first looked carefully about her to see if anyone was watching her, she
pecked and scratched at a steak that lay upon the edge of the shelf,
till at last down it fell. Then the dog snapped it up, and scrambled
away with it into a corner, where he soon ate it all up. ‘Well,’ said
the sparrow, ‘you shall have some more if you will; so come with me to
the next shop, and I will peck you down another steak.’ When the dog had
eaten this too, the sparrow said to him, ‘Well, my good friend, have you
had enough now?’ ‘I have had plenty of meat,’ answered he, ‘but I should
like to have a piece of bread to eat after it.’ ‘Come with me then,’
said the sparrow, ‘and you shall soon have that too.’ So she took him
to a baker’s shop, and pecked at two rolls that lay in the window, till
they fell down: and as the dog still wished for more, she took him to
another shop and pecked down some more for him. When that was eaten, the
sparrow asked him whether he had had enough now. ‘Yes,’ said he; ‘and
now let us take a walk a little way out of the town.’ So they both went
out upon the high road; but as the weather was warm, they had not gone
far before the dog said, ‘I am very much tired--I should like to take a
nap.’ ‘Very well,’ answered the sparrow, ‘do so, and in the meantime
I will perch upon that bush.’ So the dog stretched himself out on the
road, and fell fast asleep. Whilst he slept, there came by a carter with
a cart drawn by three horses, and loaded with two casks of wine. The
sparrow, seeing that the carter did not turn out of the way, but would
go on in the track in which the dog lay, so as to drive over him, called
out, ‘Stop! stop! Mr Carter, or it shall be the worse for you.’ But the
carter, grumbling to himself, ‘You make it the worse for me, indeed!
what can you do?’ cracked his whip, and drove his cart over the poor
dog, so that the wheels crushed him to death. ‘There,’ cried the
sparrow, ‘thou cruel villain, thou hast killed my friend the dog. Now
mind what I say. This deed of thine shall cost thee all thou art worth.’
‘Do your worst, and welcome,’ said the brute, ‘what harm can you do me?’
and passed on. But the sparrow crept under the tilt of the cart, and
pecked at the bung of one of the casks till she loosened it; and then
all the wine ran out, without the carter seeing it. At last he looked
round, and saw that the cart was dripping, and the cask quite empty.
‘What an unlucky wretch I am!’ cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said
the sparrow, as she alighted upon the head of one of the horses, and
pecked at him till he reared up and kicked. When the carter saw this,
he drew out his hatchet and aimed a blow at the sparrow, meaning to kill
her; but she flew away, and the blow fell upon the poor horse’s head
with such force, that he fell down dead. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’
cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the sparrow. And as the carter
went on with the other two horses, she again crept under the tilt of the
cart, and pecked out the bung of the second cask, so that all the wine
ran out. When the carter saw this, he again cried out, ‘Miserable wretch
that I am!’ But the sparrow answered, ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ and
perched on the head of the second horse, and pecked at him too. The
carter ran up and struck at her again with his hatchet; but away she
flew, and the blow fell upon the second horse and killed him on the
spot. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’ said he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said
the sparrow; and perching upon the third horse, she began to peck him
too. The carter was mad with fury; and without looking about him, or
caring what he was about, struck again at the sparrow; but killed his
third horse as he done the other two. ‘Alas! miserable wretch that I
am!’ cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ answered the sparrow as she flew
away; ‘now will I plague and punish thee at thy own house.’ The
carter was forced at last to leave his cart behind him, and to go home
overflowing with rage and vexation. ‘Alas!’ said he to his wife, ‘what
ill luck has befallen me!--my wine is all spilt, and my horses all three
dead.’ ‘Alas! husband,’ replied she, ‘and a wicked bird has come into
the house, and has brought with her all the birds in the world, I am
sure, and they have fallen upon our corn in the loft, and are eating it
up at such a rate!’ Away ran the husband upstairs, and saw thousands of
birds sitting upon the floor eating up his corn, with the sparrow in the
midst of them. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’ cried the carter; for he saw
that the corn was almost all gone. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the
sparrow; ‘thy cruelty shall cost thee thy life yet!’ and away she flew.

The carter seeing that he had thus lost all that he had, went down
into his kitchen; and was still not sorry for what he had done, but sat
himself angrily and sulkily in the chimney corner. But the sparrow sat
on the outside of the window, and cried ‘Carter! thy cruelty shall cost
thee thy life!’ With that he jumped up in a rage, seized his hatchet,
and threw it at the sparrow; but it missed her, and only broke the
window. The sparrow now hopped in, perched upon the window-seat, and
cried, ‘Carter! it shall cost thee thy life!’ Then he became mad and
blind with rage, and struck the window-seat with such force that he
cleft it in two: and as the sparrow flew from place to place, the carter
and his wife were so furious, that they broke all their furniture,
glasses, chairs, benches, the table, and at last the walls, without
touching the bird at all. In the end, however, they caught her: and the
wife said, ‘Shall I kill her at once?’ ‘No,’ cried he, ‘that is letting
her off too easily: she shall die a much more cruel death; I will eat
her.’ But the sparrow began to flutter about, and stretch out her neck
and cried, ‘Carter! it shall cost thee thy life yet!’ With that he
could wait no longer: so he gave his wife the hatchet, and cried, ‘Wife,
strike at the bird and kill her in my hand.’ And the wife struck; but
she missed her aim, and hit her husband on the head so that he fell down
dead, and the sparrow flew quietly home to her nest.




THE TWELVE DANCING PRINCESSES

There was a king who had twelve beautiful daughters. They slept in
twelve beds all in one room; and when they went to bed, the doors were
shut and locked up; but every morning their shoes were found to be quite
worn through as if they had been danced in all night; and yet nobody
could find out how it happened, or where they had been.

Then the king made it known to all the land, that if any person could
discover the secret, and find out where it was that the princesses
danced in the night, he should have the one he liked best for his
wife, and should be king after his death; but whoever tried and did not
succeed, after three days and nights, should be put to death.

A king’s son soon came. He was well entertained, and in the evening was
taken to the chamber next to the one where the princesses lay in their
twelve beds. There he was to sit and watch where they went to dance;
and, in order that nothing might pass without his hearing it, the door
of his chamber was left open. But the king’s son soon fell asleep; and
when he awoke in the morning he found that the princesses had all been
dancing, for the soles of their shoes were full of holes. The same thing
happened the second and third night: so the king ordered his head to be
cut off. After him came several others; but they had all the same luck,
and all lost their lives in the same manner.

Now it chanced that an old soldier, who had been wounded in battle
and could fight no longer, passed through the country where this king
reigned: and as he was travelling through a wood, he met an old woman,
who asked him where he was going. ‘I hardly know where I am going, or
what I had better do,’ said the soldier; ‘but I think I should like very
well to find out where it is that the princesses dance, and then in time
I might be a king.’ ‘Well,’ said the old dame, ‘that is no very hard
task: only take care not to drink any of the wine which one of the
princesses will bring to you in the evening; and as soon as she leaves
you pretend to be fast asleep.’

Then she gave him a cloak, and said, ‘As soon as you put that on
you will become invisible, and you will then be able to follow the
princesses wherever they go.’ When the soldier heard all this good
counsel, he determined to try his luck: so he went to the king, and said
he was willing to undertake the task.

He was as well received as the others had been, and the king ordered
fine royal robes to be given him; and when the evening came he was led
to the outer chamber. Just as he was going to lie down, the eldest of
the princesses brought him a cup of wine; but the soldier threw it all
away secretly, taking care not to drink a drop. Then he laid himself
down on his bed, and in a little while began to snore very loud as if
he was fast asleep. When the twelve princesses heard this they laughed
heartily; and the eldest said, ‘This fellow too might have done a wiser
thing than lose his life in this way!’ Then they rose up and opened
their drawers and boxes, and took out all their fine clothes, and
dressed themselves at the glass, and skipped about as if they were eager
to begin dancing. But the youngest said, ‘I don’t know how it is, while
you are so happy I feel very uneasy; I am sure some mischance will
befall us.’ ‘You simpleton,’ said the eldest, ‘you are always afraid;
have you forgotten how many kings’ sons have already watched in vain?
And as for this soldier, even if I had not given him his sleeping
draught, he would have slept soundly enough.’

When they were all ready, they went and looked at the soldier; but he
snored on, and did not stir hand or foot: so they thought they were
quite safe; and the eldest went up to her own bed and clapped her hands,
and the bed sank into the floor and a trap-door flew open. The soldier
saw them going down through the trap-door one after another, the eldest
leading the way; and thinking he had no time to lose, he jumped up, put
on the cloak which the old woman had given him, and followed them;
but in the middle of the stairs he trod on the gown of the youngest
princess, and she cried out to her sisters, ‘All is not right; someone
took hold of my gown.’ ‘You silly creature!’ said the eldest, ‘it is
nothing but a nail in the wall.’ Then down they all went, and at the
bottom they found themselves in a most delightful grove of trees; and
the leaves were all of silver, and glittered and sparkled beautifully.
The soldier wished to take away some token of the place; so he broke
off a little branch, and there came a loud noise from the tree. Then the
youngest daughter said again, ‘I am sure all is not right--did not you
hear that noise? That never happened before.’ But the eldest said, ‘It
is only our princes, who are shouting for joy at our approach.’

Then they came to another grove of trees, where all the leaves were of
gold; and afterwards to a third, where the leaves were all glittering
diamonds. And the soldier broke a branch from each; and every time there
was a loud noise, which made the youngest sister tremble with fear; but
the eldest still said, it was only the princes, who were crying for joy.
So they went on till they came to a great lake; and at the side of the
lake there lay twelve little boats with twelve handsome princes in them,
who seemed to be waiting there for the princesses.

One of the princesses went into each boat, and the soldier stepped into
the same boat with the youngest. As they were rowing over the lake, the
prince who was in the boat with the youngest princess and the soldier
said, ‘I do not know why it is, but though I am rowing with all my might
we do not get on so fast as usual, and I am quite tired: the boat
seems very heavy today.’ ‘It is only the heat of the weather,’ said the
princess: ‘I feel it very warm too.’

On the other side of the lake stood a fine illuminated castle, from
which came the merry music of horns and trumpets. There they all landed,
and went into the castle, and each prince danced with his princess; and
the soldier, who was all the time invisible, danced with them too; and
when any of the princesses had a cup of wine set by her, he drank it
all up, so that when she put the cup to her mouth it was empty. At this,
too, the youngest sister was terribly frightened, but the eldest always
silenced her. They danced on till three o’clock in the morning, and then
all their shoes were worn out, so that they were obliged to leave off.
The princes rowed them back again over the lake (but this time the
soldier placed himself in the boat with the eldest princess); and on the
opposite shore they took leave of each other, the princesses promising
to come again the next night.

When they came to the stairs, the soldier ran on before the princesses,
and laid himself down; and as the twelve sisters slowly came up very
much tired, they heard him snoring in his bed; so they said, ‘Now all
is quite safe’; then they undressed themselves, put away their fine
clothes, pulled off their shoes, and went to bed. In the morning the
soldier said nothing about what had happened, but determined to see more
of this strange adventure, and went again the second and third night;
and every thing happened just as before; the princesses danced each time
till their shoes were worn to pieces, and then returned home. However,
on the third night the soldier carried away one of the golden cups as a
token of where he had been.

As soon as the time came when he was to declare the secret, he was taken
before the king with the three branches and the golden cup; and the
twelve princesses stood listening behind the door to hear what he would
say. And when the king asked him. ‘Where do my twelve daughters dance at
night?’ he answered, ‘With twelve princes in a castle under ground.’ And
then he told the king all that had happened, and showed him the three
branches and the golden cup which he had brought with him. Then the king
called for the princesses, and asked them whether what the soldier said
was true: and when they saw that they were discovered, and that it was
of no use to deny what had happened, they confessed it all. And the king
asked the soldier which of them he would choose for his wife; and he
answered, ‘I am not very young, so I will have the eldest.’--And they
were married that very day, and the soldier was chosen to be the king’s
heir.




THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE

There was once a fisherman who lived with his wife in a pigsty, close
by the seaside. The fisherman used to go out all day long a-fishing; and
one day, as he sat on the shore with his rod, looking at the sparkling
waves and watching his line, all on a sudden his float was dragged away
deep into the water: and in drawing it up he pulled out a great fish.
But the fish said, ‘Pray let me live! I am not a real fish; I am an
enchanted prince: put me in the water again, and let me go!’ ‘Oh, ho!’
said the man, ‘you need not make so many words about the matter; I will
have nothing to do with a fish that can talk: so swim away, sir, as soon
as you please!’ Then he put him back into the water, and the fish darted
straight down to the bottom, and left a long streak of blood behind him
on the wave.

When the fisherman went home to his wife in the pigsty, he told her how
he had caught a great fish, and how it had told him it was an enchanted
prince, and how, on hearing it speak, he had let it go again. ‘Did not
you ask it for anything?’ said the wife, ‘we live very wretchedly here,
in this nasty dirty pigsty; do go back and tell the fish we want a snug
little cottage.’

The fisherman did not much like the business: however, he went to the
seashore; and when he came back there the water looked all yellow and
green. And he stood at the water’s edge, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

Then the fish came swimming to him, and said, ‘Well, what is her will?
What does your wife want?’ ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘she says that when
I had caught you, I ought to have asked you for something before I let
you go; she does not like living any longer in the pigsty, and wants
a snug little cottage.’ ‘Go home, then,’ said the fish; ‘she is in the
cottage already!’ So the man went home, and saw his wife standing at the
door of a nice trim little cottage. ‘Come in, come in!’ said she; ‘is
not this much better than the filthy pigsty we had?’ And there was a
parlour, and a bedchamber, and a kitchen; and behind the cottage there
was a little garden, planted with all sorts of flowers and fruits; and
there was a courtyard behind, full of ducks and chickens. ‘Ah!’ said the
fisherman, ‘how happily we shall live now!’ ‘We will try to do so, at
least,’ said his wife.

Everything went right for a week or two, and then Dame Ilsabill said,
‘Husband, there is not near room enough for us in this cottage; the
courtyard and the garden are a great deal too small; I should like to
have a large stone castle to live in: go to the fish again and tell him
to give us a castle.’ ‘Wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘I don’t like to go to
him again, for perhaps he will be angry; we ought to be easy with this
pretty cottage to live in.’ ‘Nonsense!’ said the wife; ‘he will do it
very willingly, I know; go along and try!’

The fisherman went, but his heart was very heavy: and when he came to
the sea, it looked blue and gloomy, though it was very calm; and he went
close to the edge of the waves, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘Well, what does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the man,
dolefully, ‘my wife wants to live in a stone castle.’ ‘Go home, then,’
said the fish; ‘she is standing at the gate of it already.’ So away went
the fisherman, and found his wife standing before the gate of a great
castle. ‘See,’ said she, ‘is not this grand?’ With that they went into
the castle together, and found a great many servants there, and the
rooms all richly furnished, and full of golden chairs and tables; and
behind the castle was a garden, and around it was a park half a
mile long, full of sheep, and goats, and hares, and deer; and in the
courtyard were stables and cow-houses. ‘Well,’ said the man, ‘now we
will live cheerful and happy in this beautiful castle for the rest of
our lives.’ ‘Perhaps we may,’ said the wife; ‘but let us sleep upon it,
before we make up our minds to that.’ So they went to bed.

The next morning when Dame Ilsabill awoke it was broad daylight, and
she jogged the fisherman with her elbow, and said, ‘Get up, husband,
and bestir yourself, for we must be king of all the land.’ ‘Wife, wife,’
said the man, ‘why should we wish to be the king? I will not be king.’
‘Then I will,’ said she. ‘But, wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘how can you
be king--the fish cannot make you a king?’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘say
no more about it, but go and try! I will be king.’ So the man went away
quite sorrowful to think that his wife should want to be king. This time
the sea looked a dark grey colour, and was overspread with curling waves
and the ridges of foam as he cried out:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘Well, what would she have now?’ said the fish. ‘Alas!’ said the poor
man, ‘my wife wants to be king.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is king
already.’

Then the fisherman went home; and as he came close to the palace he saw
a troop of soldiers, and heard the sound of drums and trumpets. And when
he went in he saw his wife sitting on a throne of gold and diamonds,
with a golden crown upon her head; and on each side of her stood six
fair maidens, each a head taller than the other. ‘Well, wife,’ said the
fisherman, ‘are you king?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am king.’ And when he had
looked at her for a long time, he said, ‘Ah, wife! what a fine thing it
is to be king! Now we shall never have anything more to wish for as long
as we live.’ ‘I don’t know how that may be,’ said she; ‘never is a long
time. I am king, it is true; but I begin to be tired of that, and I
think I should like to be emperor.’ ‘Alas, wife! why should you wish to
be emperor?’ said the fisherman. ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘go to the fish!
I say I will be emperor.’ ‘Ah, wife!’ replied the fisherman, ‘the fish
cannot make an emperor, I am sure, and I should not like to ask him for
such a thing.’ ‘I am king,’ said Ilsabill, ‘and you are my slave; so go
at once!’

So the fisherman was forced to go; and he muttered as he went along,
‘This will come to no good, it is too much to ask; the fish will be
tired at last, and then we shall be sorry for what we have done.’ He
soon came to the seashore; and the water was quite black and muddy, and
a mighty whirlwind blew over the waves and rolled them about, but he
went as near as he could to the water’s brink, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What would she have now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman,
‘she wants to be emperor.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is emperor
already.’

So he went home again; and as he came near he saw his wife Ilsabill
sitting on a very lofty throne made of solid gold, with a great crown on
her head full two yards high; and on each side of her stood her guards
and attendants in a row, each one smaller than the other, from the
tallest giant down to a little dwarf no bigger than my finger. And
before her stood princes, and dukes, and earls: and the fisherman went
up to her and said, ‘Wife, are you emperor?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am
emperor.’ ‘Ah!’ said the man, as he gazed upon her, ‘what a fine thing
it is to be emperor!’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘why should we stop at being
emperor? I will be pope next.’ ‘O wife, wife!’ said he, ‘how can you be
pope? there is but one pope at a time in Christendom.’ ‘Husband,’ said
she, ‘I will be pope this very day.’ ‘But,’ replied the husband, ‘the
fish cannot make you pope.’ ‘What nonsense!’ said she; ‘if he can make
an emperor, he can make a pope: go and try him.’

So the fisherman went. But when he came to the shore the wind was raging
and the sea was tossed up and down in boiling waves, and the ships were
in trouble, and rolled fearfully upon the tops of the billows. In the
middle of the heavens there was a little piece of blue sky, but towards
the south all was red, as if a dreadful storm was rising. At this sight
the fisherman was dreadfully frightened, and he trembled so that his
knees knocked together: but still he went down near to the shore, and
said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘my
wife wants to be pope.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is pope already.’

Then the fisherman went home, and found Ilsabill sitting on a throne
that was two miles high. And she had three great crowns on her head, and
around her stood all the pomp and power of the Church. And on each side
of her were two rows of burning lights, of all sizes, the greatest as
large as the highest and biggest tower in the world, and the least no
larger than a small rushlight. ‘Wife,’ said the fisherman, as he looked
at all this greatness, ‘are you pope?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am pope.’
‘Well, wife,’ replied he, ‘it is a grand thing to be pope; and now
you must be easy, for you can be nothing greater.’ ‘I will think about
that,’ said the wife. Then they went to bed: but Dame Ilsabill could not
sleep all night for thinking what she should be next. At last, as she
was dropping asleep, morning broke, and the sun rose. ‘Ha!’ thought she,
as she woke up and looked at it through the window, ‘after all I cannot
prevent the sun rising.’ At this thought she was very angry, and wakened
her husband, and said, ‘Husband, go to the fish and tell him I must
be lord of the sun and moon.’ The fisherman was half asleep, but the
thought frightened him so much that he started and fell out of bed.
‘Alas, wife!’ said he, ‘cannot you be easy with being pope?’ ‘No,’
said she, ‘I am very uneasy as long as the sun and moon rise without my
leave. Go to the fish at once!’

Then the man went shivering with fear; and as he was going down to
the shore a dreadful storm arose, so that the trees and the very rocks
shook. And all the heavens became black with stormy clouds, and the
lightnings played, and the thunders rolled; and you might have seen in
the sea great black waves, swelling up like mountains with crowns of
white foam upon their heads. And the fisherman crept towards the sea,
and cried out, as well as he could:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said he, ‘she wants to
be lord of the sun and moon.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish, ‘to your pigsty
again.’

And there they live to this very day.




THE WILLOW-WREN AND THE BEAR

Once in summer-time the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest,
and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said: ‘Brother
wolf, what bird is it that sings so well?’ ‘That is the King of birds,’
said the wolf, ‘before whom we must bow down.’ In reality the bird was
the willow-wren. ‘IF that’s the case,’ said the bear, ‘I should very
much like to see his royal palace; come, take me thither.’ ‘That is not
done quite as you seem to think,’ said the wolf; ‘you must wait until
the Queen comes,’ Soon afterwards, the Queen arrived with some food in
her beak, and the lord King came too, and they began to feed their young
ones. The bear would have liked to go at once, but the wolf held him
back by the sleeve, and said: ‘No, you must wait until the lord and lady
Queen have gone away again.’ So they took stock of the hole where the
nest lay, and trotted away. The bear, however, could not rest until he
had seen the royal palace, and when a short time had passed, went to it
again. The King and Queen had just flown out, so he peeped in and saw
five or six young ones lying there. ‘Is that the royal palace?’ cried
the bear; ‘it is a wretched palace, and you are not King’s children, you
are disreputable children!’ When the young wrens heard that, they were
frightfully angry, and screamed: ‘No, that we are not! Our parents are
honest people! Bear, you will have to pay for that!’

The bear and the wolf grew uneasy, and turned back and went into their
holes. The young willow-wrens, however, continued to cry and scream, and
when their parents again brought food they said: ‘We will not so much as
touch one fly’s leg, no, not if we were dying of hunger, until you have
settled whether we are respectable children or not; the bear has been
here and has insulted us!’ Then the old King said: ‘Be easy, he shall
be punished,’ and he at once flew with the Queen to the bear’s cave, and
called in: ‘Old Growler, why have you insulted my children? You shall
suffer for it--we will punish you by a bloody war.’ Thus war was
announced to the Bear, and all four-footed animals were summoned to take
part in it, oxen, asses, cows, deer, and every other animal the earth
contained. And the willow-wren summoned everything which flew in the
air, not only birds, large and small, but midges, and hornets, bees and
flies had to come.

When the time came for the war to begin, the willow-wren sent out spies
to discover who was the enemy’s commander-in-chief. The gnat, who was
the most crafty, flew into the forest where the enemy was assembled,
and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where the password was to be
announced. There stood the bear, and he called the fox before him
and said: ‘Fox, you are the most cunning of all animals, you shall be
general and lead us.’ ‘Good,’ said the fox, ‘but what signal shall we
agree upon?’ No one knew that, so the fox said: ‘I have a fine long
bushy tail, which almost looks like a plume of red feathers. When I lift
my tail up quite high, all is going well, and you must charge; but if I
let it hang down, run away as fast as you can.’ When the gnat had heard
that, she flew away again, and revealed everything, down to the minutest
detail, to the willow-wren. When day broke, and the battle was to begin,
all the four-footed animals came running up with such a noise that the
earth trembled. The willow-wren with his army also came flying through
the air with such a humming, and whirring, and swarming that every one
was uneasy and afraid, and on both sides they advanced against each
other. But the willow-wren sent down the hornet, with orders to settle
beneath the fox’s tail, and sting with all his might. When the fox felt
the first string, he started so that he lifted one leg, from pain, but
he bore it, and still kept his tail high in the air; at the second
sting, he was forced to put it down for a moment; at the third, he could
hold out no longer, screamed, and put his tail between his legs. When
the animals saw that, they thought all was lost, and began to flee, each
into his hole, and the birds had won the battle.

Then the King and Queen flew home to their children and cried:
‘Children, rejoice, eat and drink to your heart’s content, we have won
the battle!’ But the young wrens said: ‘We will not eat yet, the bear
must come to the nest, and beg for pardon and say that we are honourable
children, before we will do that.’ Then the willow-wren flew to the
bear’s hole and cried: ‘Growler, you are to come to the nest to my
children, and beg their pardon, or else every rib of your body shall
be broken.’ So the bear crept thither in the greatest fear, and begged
their pardon. And now at last the young wrens were satisfied, and sat
down together and ate and drank, and made merry till quite late into the
night.




THE FROG-PRINCE

One fine evening a young princess put on her bonnet and clogs, and went
out to take a walk by herself in a wood; and when she came to a cool
spring of water, that rose in the midst of it, she sat herself down
to rest a while. Now she had a golden ball in her hand, which was her
favourite plaything; and she was always tossing it up into the air, and
catching it again as it fell. After a time she threw it up so high that
she missed catching it as it fell; and the ball bounded away, and rolled
along upon the ground, till at last it fell down into the spring. The
princess looked into the spring after her ball, but it was very deep, so
deep that she could not see the bottom of it. Then she began to bewail
her loss, and said, ‘Alas! if I could only get my ball again, I would
give all my fine clothes and jewels, and everything that I have in the
world.’

Whilst she was speaking, a frog put its head out of the water, and said,
‘Princess, why do you weep so bitterly?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘what can you
do for me, you nasty frog? My golden ball has fallen into the spring.’
The frog said, ‘I want not your pearls, and jewels, and fine clothes;
but if you will love me, and let me live with you and eat from off
your golden plate, and sleep upon your bed, I will bring you your ball
again.’ ‘What nonsense,’ thought the princess, ‘this silly frog is
talking! He can never even get out of the spring to visit me, though
he may be able to get my ball for me, and therefore I will tell him he
shall have what he asks.’ So she said to the frog, ‘Well, if you will
bring me my ball, I will do all you ask.’ Then the frog put his head
down, and dived deep under the water; and after a little while he came
up again, with the ball in his mouth, and threw it on the edge of the
spring. As soon as the young princess saw her ball, she ran to pick
it up; and she was so overjoyed to have it in her hand again, that she
never thought of the frog, but ran home with it as fast as she could.
The frog called after her, ‘Stay, princess, and take me with you as you
said,’ But she did not stop to hear a word.

The next day, just as the princess had sat down to dinner, she heard a
strange noise--tap, tap--plash, plash--as if something was coming up the
marble staircase: and soon afterwards there was a gentle knock at the
door, and a little voice cried out and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

Then the princess ran to the door and opened it, and there she saw
the frog, whom she had quite forgotten. At this sight she was sadly
frightened, and shutting the door as fast as she could came back to her
seat. The king, her father, seeing that something had frightened her,
asked her what was the matter. ‘There is a nasty frog,’ said she, ‘at
the door, that lifted my ball for me out of the spring this morning: I
told him that he should live with me here, thinking that he could never
get out of the spring; but there he is at the door, and he wants to come
in.’

While she was speaking the frog knocked again at the door, and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

Then the king said to the young princess, ‘As you have given your word
you must keep it; so go and let him in.’ She did so, and the frog hopped
into the room, and then straight on--tap, tap--plash, plash--from the
bottom of the room to the top, till he came up close to the table where
the princess sat. ‘Pray lift me upon chair,’ said he to the princess,
‘and let me sit next to you.’ As soon as she had done this, the frog
said, ‘Put your plate nearer to me, that I may eat out of it.’ This
she did, and when he had eaten as much as he could, he said, ‘Now I am
tired; carry me upstairs, and put me into your bed.’ And the princess,
though very unwilling, took him up in her hand, and put him upon the
pillow of her own bed, where he slept all night long. As soon as it was
light he jumped up, hopped downstairs, and went out of the house.
‘Now, then,’ thought the princess, ‘at last he is gone, and I shall be
troubled with him no more.’

But she was mistaken; for when night came again she heard the same
tapping at the door; and the frog came once more, and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

And when the princess opened the door the frog came in, and slept upon
her pillow as before, till the morning broke. And the third night he did
the same. But when the princess awoke on the following morning she was
astonished to see, instead of the frog, a handsome prince, gazing on her
with the most beautiful eyes she had ever seen, and standing at the head
of her bed.

He told her that he had been enchanted by a spiteful fairy, who had
changed him into a frog; and that he had been fated so to abide till
some princess should take him out of the spring, and let him eat from
her plate, and sleep upon her bed for three nights. ‘You,’ said the
prince, ‘have broken his cruel charm, and now I have nothing to wish for
but that you should go with me into my father’s kingdom, where I will
marry you, and love you as long as you live.’

The young princess, you may be sure, was not long in saying ‘Yes’ to
all this; and as they spoke a gay coach drove up, with eight beautiful
horses, decked with plumes of feathers and a golden harness; and behind
the coach rode the prince’s servant, faithful Heinrich, who had bewailed
the misfortunes of his dear master during his enchantment so long and so
bitterly, that his heart had well-nigh burst.

They then took leave of the king, and got into the coach with eight
horses, and all set out, full of joy and merriment, for the prince’s
kingdom, which they reached safely; and there they lived happily a great
many years.




CAT AND MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP

A certain cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and had said so much
to her about the great love and friendship she felt for her, that at
length the mouse agreed that they should live and keep house together.
‘But we must make a provision for winter, or else we shall suffer
from hunger,’ said the cat; ‘and you, little mouse, cannot venture
everywhere, or you will be caught in a trap some day.’ The good advice
was followed, and a pot of fat was bought, but they did not know where
to put it. At length, after much consideration, the cat said: ‘I know no
place where it will be better stored up than in the church, for no one
dares take anything away from there. We will set it beneath the altar,
and not touch it until we are really in need of it.’ So the pot was
placed in safety, but it was not long before the cat had a great
yearning for it, and said to the mouse: ‘I want to tell you something,
little mouse; my cousin has brought a little son into the world, and has
asked me to be godmother; he is white with brown spots, and I am to hold
him over the font at the christening. Let me go out today, and you look
after the house by yourself.’ ‘Yes, yes,’ answered the mouse, ‘by all
means go, and if you get anything very good to eat, think of me. I
should like a drop of sweet red christening wine myself.’ All this,
however, was untrue; the cat had no cousin, and had not been asked to
be godmother. She went straight to the church, stole to the pot of fat,
began to lick at it, and licked the top of the fat off. Then she took a
walk upon the roofs of the town, looked out for opportunities, and then
stretched herself in the sun, and licked her lips whenever she thought
of the pot of fat, and not until it was evening did she return home.
‘Well, here you are again,’ said the mouse, ‘no doubt you have had a
merry day.’ ‘All went off well,’ answered the cat. ‘What name did they
give the child?’ ‘Top off!’ said the cat quite coolly. ‘Top off!’ cried
the mouse, ‘that is a very odd and uncommon name, is it a usual one in
your family?’ ‘What does that matter,’ said the cat, ‘it is no worse
than Crumb-stealer, as your godchildren are called.’

Before long the cat was seized by another fit of yearning. She said to
the mouse: ‘You must do me a favour, and once more manage the house for
a day alone. I am again asked to be godmother, and, as the child has a
white ring round its neck, I cannot refuse.’ The good mouse consented,
but the cat crept behind the town walls to the church, and devoured
half the pot of fat. ‘Nothing ever seems so good as what one keeps to
oneself,’ said she, and was quite satisfied with her day’s work. When
she went home the mouse inquired: ‘And what was the child christened?’
‘Half-done,’ answered the cat. ‘Half-done! What are you saying? I
never heard the name in my life, I’ll wager anything it is not in the
calendar!’

The cat’s mouth soon began to water for some more licking. ‘All good
things go in threes,’ said she, ‘I am asked to stand godmother again.
The child is quite black, only it has white paws, but with that
exception, it has not a single white hair on its whole body; this only
happens once every few years, you will let me go, won’t you?’ ‘Top-off!
Half-done!’ answered the mouse, ‘they are such odd names, they make me
very thoughtful.’ ‘You sit at home,’ said the cat, ‘in your dark-grey
fur coat and long tail, and are filled with fancies, that’s because
you do not go out in the daytime.’ During the cat’s absence the mouse
cleaned the house, and put it in order, but the greedy cat entirely
emptied the pot of fat. ‘When everything is eaten up one has some
peace,’ said she to herself, and well filled and fat she did not return
home till night. The mouse at once asked what name had been given to
the third child. ‘It will not please you more than the others,’ said the
cat. ‘He is called All-gone.’ ‘All-gone,’ cried the mouse ‘that is the
most suspicious name of all! I have never seen it in print. All-gone;
what can that mean?’ and she shook her head, curled herself up, and lay
down to sleep.

From this time forth no one invited the cat to be godmother, but
when the winter had come and there was no longer anything to be found
outside, the mouse thought of their provision, and said: ‘Come, cat,
we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored up for ourselves--we
shall enjoy that.’ ‘Yes,’ answered the cat, ‘you will enjoy it as much
as you would enjoy sticking that dainty tongue of yours out of the
window.’ They set out on their way, but when they arrived, the pot of
fat certainly was still in its place, but it was empty. ‘Alas!’ said the
mouse, ‘now I see what has happened, now it comes to light! You are a true
friend! You have devoured all when you were standing godmother. First
top off, then half-done, then--’ ‘Will you hold your tongue,’ cried the
cat, ‘one word more, and I will eat you too.’ ‘All-gone’ was already on
the poor mouse’s lips; scarcely had she spoken it before the cat sprang
on her, seized her, and swallowed her down. Verily, that is the way of
the world.




THE GOOSE-GIRL

The king of a great land died, and left his queen to take care of their
only child. This child was a daughter, who was very beautiful; and her
mother loved her dearly, and was very kind to her. And there was a good
fairy too, who was fond of the princess, and helped her mother to watch
over her. When she grew up, she was betrothed to a prince who lived a
great way off; and as the time drew near for her to be married, she
got ready to set off on her journey to his country. Then the queen her
mother, packed up a great many costly things; jewels, and gold, and
silver; trinkets, fine dresses, and in short everything that became a
royal bride. And she gave her a waiting-maid to ride with her, and give
her into the bridegroom’s hands; and each had a horse for the journey.
Now the princess’s horse was the fairy’s gift, and it was called Falada,
and could speak.

When the time came for them to set out, the fairy went into her
bed-chamber, and took a little knife, and cut off a lock of her hair,
and gave it to the princess, and said, ‘Take care of it, dear child; for
it is a charm that may be of use to you on the road.’ Then they all took
a sorrowful leave of the princess; and she put the lock of hair into
her bosom, got upon her horse, and set off on her journey to her
bridegroom’s kingdom.

One day, as they were riding along by a brook, the princess began to
feel very thirsty: and she said to her maid, ‘Pray get down, and fetch
me some water in my golden cup out of yonder brook, for I want to
drink.’ ‘Nay,’ said the maid, ‘if you are thirsty, get off yourself, and
stoop down by the water and drink; I shall not be your waiting-maid any
longer.’ Then she was so thirsty that she got down, and knelt over the
little brook, and drank; for she was frightened, and dared not bring out
her golden cup; and she wept and said, ‘Alas! what will become of me?’
And the lock answered her, and said:

 ‘Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

But the princess was very gentle and meek, so she said nothing to her
maid’s ill behaviour, but got upon her horse again.

Then all rode farther on their journey, till the day grew so warm, and
the sun so scorching, that the bride began to feel very thirsty again;
and at last, when they came to a river, she forgot her maid’s rude
speech, and said, ‘Pray get down, and fetch me some water to drink in
my golden cup.’ But the maid answered her, and even spoke more haughtily
than before: ‘Drink if you will, but I shall not be your waiting-maid.’
Then the princess was so thirsty that she got off her horse, and lay
down, and held her head over the running stream, and cried and said,
‘What will become of me?’ And the lock of hair answered her again:

 ‘Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

And as she leaned down to drink, the lock of hair fell from her bosom,
and floated away with the water. Now she was so frightened that she did
not see it; but her maid saw it, and was very glad, for she knew the
charm; and she saw that the poor bride would be in her power, now that
she had lost the hair. So when the bride had done drinking, and would
have got upon Falada again, the maid said, ‘I shall ride upon Falada,
and you may have my horse instead’; so she was forced to give up her
horse, and soon afterwards to take off her royal clothes and put on her
maid’s shabby ones.

At last, as they drew near the end of their journey, this treacherous
servant threatened to kill her mistress if she ever told anyone what had
happened. But Falada saw it all, and marked it well.

Then the waiting-maid got upon Falada, and the real bride rode upon the
other horse, and they went on in this way till at last they came to the
royal court. There was great joy at their coming, and the prince flew to
meet them, and lifted the maid from her horse, thinking she was the one
who was to be his wife; and she was led upstairs to the royal chamber;
but the true princess was told to stay in the court below.

Now the old king happened just then to have nothing else to do; so he
amused himself by sitting at his kitchen window, looking at what was
going on; and he saw her in the courtyard. As she looked very pretty,
and too delicate for a waiting-maid, he went up into the royal chamber
to ask the bride who it was she had brought with her, that was thus left
standing in the court below. ‘I brought her with me for the sake of her
company on the road,’ said she; ‘pray give the girl some work to do,
that she may not be idle.’ The old king could not for some time think
of any work for her to do; but at last he said, ‘I have a lad who takes
care of my geese; she may go and help him.’ Now the name of this lad,
that the real bride was to help in watching the king’s geese, was
Curdken.

But the false bride said to the prince, ‘Dear husband, pray do me one
piece of kindness.’ ‘That I will,’ said the prince. ‘Then tell one of
your slaughterers to cut off the head of the horse I rode upon, for it
was very unruly, and plagued me sadly on the road’; but the truth was,
she was very much afraid lest Falada should some day or other speak, and
tell all she had done to the princess. She carried her point, and the
faithful Falada was killed; but when the true princess heard of it, she
wept, and begged the man to nail up Falada’s head against a large
dark gate of the city, through which she had to pass every morning
and evening, that there she might still see him sometimes. Then the
slaughterer said he would do as she wished; and cut off the head, and
nailed it up under the dark gate.

Early the next morning, as she and Curdken went out through the gate,
she said sorrowfully:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answered:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

Then they went out of the city, and drove the geese on. And when she
came to the meadow, she sat down upon a bank there, and let down her
waving locks of hair, which were all of pure silver; and when Curdken
saw it glitter in the sun, he ran up, and would have pulled some of the
locks out, but she cried:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

Then there came a wind, so strong that it blew off Curdken’s hat; and
away it flew over the hills: and he was forced to turn and run after
it; till, by the time he came back, she had done combing and curling her
hair, and had put it up again safe. Then he was very angry and sulky,
and would not speak to her at all; but they watched the geese until it
grew dark in the evening, and then drove them homewards.

The next morning, as they were going through the dark gate, the poor
girl looked up at Falada’s head, and cried:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answered:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

Then she drove on the geese, and sat down again in the meadow, and began
to comb out her hair as before; and Curdken ran up to her, and wanted to
take hold of it; but she cried out quickly:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

Then the wind came and blew away his hat; and off it flew a great way,
over the hills and far away, so that he had to run after it; and when
he came back she had bound up her hair again, and all was safe. So they
watched the geese till it grew dark.

In the evening, after they came home, Curdken went to the old king, and
said, ‘I cannot have that strange girl to help me to keep the geese any
longer.’ ‘Why?’ said the king. ‘Because, instead of doing any good, she
does nothing but tease me all day long.’ Then the king made him tell him
what had happened. And Curdken said, ‘When we go in the morning through
the dark gate with our flock of geese, she cries and talks with the head
of a horse that hangs upon the wall, and says:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answers:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

And Curdken went on telling the king what had happened upon the meadow
where the geese fed; how his hat was blown away; and how he was forced
to run after it, and to leave his flock of geese to themselves. But the
old king told the boy to go out again the next day: and when morning
came, he placed himself behind the dark gate, and heard how she spoke
to Falada, and how Falada answered. Then he went into the field, and
hid himself in a bush by the meadow’s side; and he soon saw with his own
eyes how they drove the flock of geese; and how, after a little time,
she let down her hair that glittered in the sun. And then he heard her
say:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

And soon came a gale of wind, and carried away Curdken’s hat, and away
went Curdken after it, while the girl went on combing and curling her
hair. All this the old king saw: so he went home without being seen; and
when the little goose-girl came back in the evening he called her aside,
and asked her why she did so: but she burst into tears, and said, ‘That
I must not tell you or any man, or I shall lose my life.’

But the old king begged so hard, that she had no peace till she had told
him all the tale, from beginning to end, word for word. And it was very
lucky for her that she did so, for when she had done the king ordered
royal clothes to be put upon her, and gazed on her with wonder, she was
so beautiful. Then he called his son and told him that he had only a
false bride; for that she was merely a waiting-maid, while the true
bride stood by. And the young king rejoiced when he saw her beauty, and
heard how meek and patient she had been; and without saying anything to
the false bride, the king ordered a great feast to be got ready for all
his court. The bridegroom sat at the top, with the false princess on one
side, and the true one on the other; but nobody knew her again, for her
beauty was quite dazzling to their eyes; and she did not seem at all
like the little goose-girl, now that she had her brilliant dress on.

When they had eaten and drank, and were very merry, the old king said
he would tell them a tale. So he began, and told all the story of the
princess, as if it was one that he had once heard; and he asked the
true waiting-maid what she thought ought to be done to anyone who would
behave thus. ‘Nothing better,’ said this false bride, ‘than that she
should be thrown into a cask stuck round with sharp nails, and that
two white horses should be put to it, and should drag it from street to
street till she was dead.’ ‘Thou art she!’ said the old king; ‘and as
thou has judged thyself, so shall it be done to thee.’ And the young
king was then married to his true wife, and they reigned over the
kingdom in peace and happiness all their lives; and the good fairy came
to see them, and restored the faithful Falada to life again.




THE ADVENTURES OF CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET


1. HOW THEY WENT TO THE MOUNTAINS TO EAT NUTS

‘The nuts are quite ripe now,’ said Chanticleer to his wife Partlet,
‘suppose we go together to the mountains, and eat as many as we can,
before the squirrel takes them all away.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said
Partlet, ‘let us go and make a holiday of it together.’

So they went to the mountains; and as it was a lovely day, they stayed
there till the evening. Now, whether it was that they had eaten so many
nuts that they could not walk, or whether they were lazy and would not,
I do not know: however, they took it into their heads that it did not
become them to go home on foot. So Chanticleer began to build a little
carriage of nutshells: and when it was finished, Partlet jumped into
it and sat down, and bid Chanticleer harness himself to it and draw her
home. ‘That’s a good joke!’ said Chanticleer; ‘no, that will never do;
I had rather by half walk home; I’ll sit on the box and be coachman,
if you like, but I’ll not draw.’ While this was passing, a duck came
quacking up and cried out, ‘You thieving vagabonds, what business have
you in my grounds? I’ll give it you well for your insolence!’ and upon
that she fell upon Chanticleer most lustily. But Chanticleer was no
coward, and returned the duck’s blows with his sharp spurs so fiercely
that she soon began to cry out for mercy; which was only granted her
upon condition that she would draw the carriage home for them. This she
agreed to do; and Chanticleer got upon the box, and drove, crying, ‘Now,
duck, get on as fast as you can.’ And away they went at a pretty good
pace.

After they had travelled along a little way, they met a needle and a pin
walking together along the road: and the needle cried out, ‘Stop, stop!’
and said it was so dark that they could hardly find their way, and such
dirty walking they could not get on at all: he told them that he and his
friend, the pin, had been at a public-house a few miles off, and had sat
drinking till they had forgotten how late it was; he begged therefore
that the travellers would be so kind as to give them a lift in their
carriage. Chanticleer observing that they were but thin fellows, and not
likely to take up much room, told them they might ride, but made them
promise not to dirty the wheels of the carriage in getting in, nor to
tread on Partlet’s toes.

Late at night they arrived at an inn; and as it was bad travelling in
the dark, and the duck seemed much tired, and waddled about a good
deal from one side to the other, they made up their minds to fix their
quarters there: but the landlord at first was unwilling, and said his
house was full, thinking they might not be very respectable company:
however, they spoke civilly to him, and gave him the egg which Partlet
had laid by the way, and said they would give him the duck, who was in
the habit of laying one every day: so at last he let them come in, and
they bespoke a handsome supper, and spent the evening very jollily.

Early in the morning, before it was quite light, and when nobody was
stirring in the inn, Chanticleer awakened his wife, and, fetching the
egg, they pecked a hole in it, ate it up, and threw the shells into the
fireplace: they then went to the pin and needle, who were fast asleep,
and seizing them by the heads, stuck one into the landlord’s easy chair
and the other into his handkerchief; and, having done this, they crept
away as softly as possible. However, the duck, who slept in the open
air in the yard, heard them coming, and jumping into the brook which ran
close by the inn, soon swam out of their reach.

An hour or two afterwards the landlord got up, and took his handkerchief
to wipe his face, but the pin ran into him and pricked him: then he
walked into the kitchen to light his pipe at the fire, but when he
stirred it up the eggshells flew into his eyes, and almost blinded him.
‘Bless me!’ said he, ‘all the world seems to have a design against my
head this morning’: and so saying, he threw himself sulkily into his
easy chair; but, oh dear! the needle ran into him; and this time the
pain was not in his head. He now flew into a very great passion, and,
suspecting the company who had come in the night before, he went to look
after them, but they were all off; so he swore that he never again
would take in such a troop of vagabonds, who ate a great deal, paid no
reckoning, and gave him nothing for his trouble but their apish tricks.


2. HOW CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET WENT TO VISIT MR KORBES

Another day, Chanticleer and Partlet wished to ride out together;
so Chanticleer built a handsome carriage with four red wheels, and
harnessed six mice to it; and then he and Partlet got into the carriage,
and away they drove. Soon afterwards a cat met them, and said, ‘Where
are you going?’ And Chanticleer replied,

 ‘All on our way
  A visit to pay
  To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’

Then the cat said, ‘Take me with you,’ Chanticleer said, ‘With all my
heart: get up behind, and be sure you do not fall off.’

 ‘Take care of this handsome coach of mine,
  Nor dirty my pretty red wheels so fine!
  Now, mice, be ready,
  And, wheels, run steady!
  For we are going a visit to pay
  To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’

Soon after came up a millstone, an egg, a duck, and a pin; and
Chanticleer gave them all leave to get into the carriage and go with
them.

When they arrived at Mr Korbes’s house, he was not at home; so the mice
drew the carriage into the coach-house, Chanticleer and Partlet flew
upon a beam, the cat sat down in the fireplace, the duck got into
the washing cistern, the pin stuck himself into the bed pillow, the
millstone laid himself over the house door, and the egg rolled himself
up in the towel.

When Mr Korbes came home, he went to the fireplace to make a fire; but
the cat threw all the ashes in his eyes: so he ran to the kitchen to
wash himself; but there the duck splashed all the water in his face; and
when he tried to wipe himself, the egg broke to pieces in the towel all
over his face and eyes. Then he was very angry, and went without his
supper to bed; but when he laid his head on the pillow, the pin ran into
his cheek: at this he became quite furious, and, jumping up, would have
run out of the house; but when he came to the door, the millstone fell
down on his head, and killed him on the spot.


3. HOW PARTLET DIED AND WAS BURIED, AND HOW CHANTICLEER DIED OF GRIEF

Another day Chanticleer and Partlet agreed to go again to the mountains
to eat nuts; and it was settled that all the nuts which they found
should be shared equally between them. Now Partlet found a very large
nut; but she said nothing about it to Chanticleer, and kept it all to
herself: however, it was so big that she could not swallow it, and it
stuck in her throat. Then she was in a great fright, and cried out to
Chanticleer, ‘Pray run as fast as you can, and fetch me some water, or I
shall be choked.’ Chanticleer ran as fast as he could to the river, and
said, ‘River, give me some water, for Partlet lies in the mountain, and
will be choked by a great nut.’ The river said, ‘Run first to the bride,
and ask her for a silken cord to draw up the water.’ Chanticleer ran to
the bride, and said, ‘Bride, you must give me a silken cord, for then
the river will give me water, and the water I will carry to Partlet, who
lies on the mountain, and will be choked by a great nut.’ But the bride
said, ‘Run first, and bring me my garland that is hanging on a willow
in the garden.’ Then Chanticleer ran to the garden, and took the garland
from the bough where it hung, and brought it to the bride; and then
the bride gave him the silken cord, and he took the silken cord to
the river, and the river gave him water, and he carried the water to
Partlet; but in the meantime she was choked by the great nut, and lay
quite dead, and never moved any more.

Then Chanticleer was very sorry, and cried bitterly; and all the beasts
came and wept with him over poor Partlet. And six mice built a little
hearse to carry her to her grave; and when it was ready they harnessed
themselves before it, and Chanticleer drove them. On the way they
met the fox. ‘Where are you going, Chanticleer?’ said he. ‘To bury my
Partlet,’ said the other. ‘May I go with you?’ said the fox. ‘Yes; but
you must get up behind, or my horses will not be able to draw you.’ Then
the fox got up behind; and presently the wolf, the bear, the goat, and
all the beasts of the wood, came and climbed upon the hearse.

So on they went till they came to a rapid stream. ‘How shall we get
over?’ said Chanticleer. Then said a straw, ‘I will lay myself across,
and you may pass over upon me.’ But as the mice were going over, the
straw slipped away and fell into the water, and the six mice all fell in
and were drowned. What was to be done? Then a large log of wood came
and said, ‘I am big enough; I will lay myself across the stream, and you
shall pass over upon me.’ So he laid himself down; but they managed
so clumsily, that the log of wood fell in and was carried away by the
stream. Then a stone, who saw what had happened, came up and kindly
offered to help poor Chanticleer by laying himself across the stream;
and this time he got safely to the other side with the hearse, and
managed to get Partlet out of it; but the fox and the other mourners,
who were sitting behind, were too heavy, and fell back into the water
and were all carried away by the stream and drowned.

Thus Chanticleer was left alone with his dead Partlet; and having dug
a grave for her, he laid her in it, and made a little hillock over her.
Then he sat down by the grave, and wept and mourned, till at last he
died too; and so all were dead.




RAPUNZEL

There were once a man and a woman who had long in vain wished for a
child. At length the woman hoped that God was about to grant her desire.
These people had a little window at the back of their house from which
a splendid garden could be seen, which was full of the most beautiful
flowers and herbs. It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no
one dared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress, who had
great power and was dreaded by all the world. One day the woman was
standing by this window and looking down into the garden, when she saw a
bed which was planted with the most beautiful rampion (rapunzel), and it
looked so fresh and green that she longed for it, she quite pined away,
and began to look pale and miserable. Then her husband was alarmed, and
asked: ‘What ails you, dear wife?’ ‘Ah,’ she replied, ‘if I can’t eat
some of the rampion, which is in the garden behind our house, I shall
die.’ The man, who loved her, thought: ‘Sooner than let your wife die,
bring her some of the rampion yourself, let it cost what it will.’
At twilight, he clambered down over the wall into the garden of the
enchantress, hastily clutched a handful of rampion, and took it to his
wife. She at once made herself a salad of it, and ate it greedily. It
tasted so good to her--so very good, that the next day she longed for it
three times as much as before. If he was to have any rest, her husband
must once more descend into the garden. In the gloom of evening
therefore, he let himself down again; but when he had clambered down the
wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw the enchantress standing before
him. ‘How can you dare,’ said she with angry look, ‘descend into my
garden and steal my rampion like a thief? You shall suffer for it!’
‘Ah,’ answered he, ‘let mercy take the place of justice, I only made
up my mind to do it out of necessity. My wife saw your rampion from the
window, and felt such a longing for it that she would have died if she
had not got some to eat.’ Then the enchantress allowed her anger to be
softened, and said to him: ‘If the case be as you say, I will allow
you to take away with you as much rampion as you will, only I make one
condition, you must give me the child which your wife will bring into
the world; it shall be well treated, and I will care for it like a
mother.’ The man in his terror consented to everything, and when the
woman was brought to bed, the enchantress appeared at once, gave the
child the name of Rapunzel, and took it away with her.

Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child under the sun. When she was
twelve years old, the enchantress shut her into a tower, which lay in
a forest, and had neither stairs nor door, but quite at the top was a
little window. When the enchantress wanted to go in, she placed herself
beneath it and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold, and when she
heard the voice of the enchantress she unfastened her braided tresses,
wound them round one of the hooks of the window above, and then the hair
fell twenty ells down, and the enchantress climbed up by it.

After a year or two, it came to pass that the king’s son rode through
the forest and passed by the tower. Then he heard a song, which was so
charming that he stood still and listened. This was Rapunzel, who in her
solitude passed her time in letting her sweet voice resound. The king’s
son wanted to climb up to her, and looked for the door of the tower,
but none was to be found. He rode home, but the singing had so deeply
touched his heart, that every day he went out into the forest and
listened to it. Once when he was thus standing behind a tree, he saw
that an enchantress came there, and he heard how she cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Then Rapunzel let down the braids of her hair, and the enchantress
climbed up to her. ‘If that is the ladder by which one mounts, I too
will try my fortune,’ said he, and the next day when it began to grow
dark, he went to the tower and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Immediately the hair fell down and the king’s son climbed up.

At first Rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man, such as her eyes
had never yet beheld, came to her; but the king’s son began to talk to
her quite like a friend, and told her that his heart had been so stirred
that it had let him have no rest, and he had been forced to see her.
Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she would take
him for her husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she
thought: ‘He will love me more than old Dame Gothel does’; and she said
yes, and laid her hand in his. She said: ‘I will willingly go away with
you, but I do not know how to get down. Bring with you a skein of silk
every time that you come, and I will weave a ladder with it, and when
that is ready I will descend, and you will take me on your horse.’ They
agreed that until that time he should come to her every evening, for the
old woman came by day. The enchantress remarked nothing of this, until
once Rapunzel said to her: ‘Tell me, Dame Gothel, how it happens that
you are so much heavier for me to draw up than the young king’s son--he
is with me in a moment.’ ‘Ah! you wicked child,’ cried the enchantress.
‘What do I hear you say! I thought I had separated you from all
the world, and yet you have deceived me!’ In her anger she clutched
Rapunzel’s beautiful tresses, wrapped them twice round her left hand,
seized a pair of scissors with the right, and snip, snap, they were cut
off, and the lovely braids lay on the ground. And she was so pitiless
that she took poor Rapunzel into a desert where she had to live in great
grief and misery.

On the same day that she cast out Rapunzel, however, the enchantress
fastened the braids of hair, which she had cut off, to the hook of the
window, and when the king’s son came and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

she let the hair down. The king’s son ascended, but instead of finding
his dearest Rapunzel, he found the enchantress, who gazed at him with
wicked and venomous looks. ‘Aha!’ she cried mockingly, ‘you would fetch
your dearest, but the beautiful bird sits no longer singing in the nest;
the cat has got it, and will scratch out your eyes as well. Rapunzel is
lost to you; you will never see her again.’ The king’s son was beside
himself with pain, and in his despair he leapt down from the tower. He
escaped with his life, but the thorns into which he fell pierced his
eyes. Then he wandered quite blind about the forest, ate nothing but
roots and berries, and did naught but lament and weep over the loss of
his dearest wife. Thus he roamed about in misery for some years, and at
length came to the desert where Rapunzel, with the twins to which she
had given birth, a boy and a girl, lived in wretchedness. He heard a
voice, and it seemed so familiar to him that he went towards it, and
when he approached, Rapunzel knew him and fell on his neck and wept. Two
of her tears wetted his eyes and they grew clear again, and he could
see with them as before. He led her to his kingdom where he was
joyfully received, and they lived for a long time afterwards, happy and
contented.




FUNDEVOGEL

There was once a forester who went into the forest to hunt, and as
he entered it he heard a sound of screaming as if a little child were
there. He followed the sound, and at last came to a high tree, and at
the top of this a little child was sitting, for the mother had fallen
asleep under the tree with the child, and a bird of prey had seen it in
her arms, had flown down, snatched it away, and set it on the high tree.

The forester climbed up, brought the child down, and thought to himself:
‘You will take him home with you, and bring him up with your Lina.’ He
took it home, therefore, and the two children grew up together. And the
one, which he had found on a tree was called Fundevogel, because a bird
had carried it away. Fundevogel and Lina loved each other so dearly that
when they did not see each other they were sad.

Now the forester had an old cook, who one evening took two pails and
began to fetch water, and did not go once only, but many times, out
to the spring. Lina saw this and said, ‘Listen, old Sanna, why are you
fetching so much water?’ ‘If you will never repeat it to anyone, I will
tell you why.’ So Lina said, no, she would never repeat it to anyone,
and then the cook said: ‘Early tomorrow morning, when the forester
is out hunting, I will heat the water, and when it is boiling in the
kettle, I will throw in Fundevogel, and will boil him in it.’

Early next morning the forester got up and went out hunting, and when he
was gone the children were still in bed. Then Lina said to Fundevogel:
‘If you will never leave me, I too will never leave you.’ Fundevogel
said: ‘Neither now, nor ever will I leave you.’ Then said Lina: ‘Then
will I tell you. Last night, old Sanna carried so many buckets of water
into the house that I asked her why she was doing that, and she said
that if I would promise not to tell anyone, and she said that early
tomorrow morning when father was out hunting, she would set the kettle
full of water, throw you into it and boil you; but we will get up
quickly, dress ourselves, and go away together.’

The two children therefore got up, dressed themselves quickly, and went
away. When the water in the kettle was boiling, the cook went into the
bedroom to fetch Fundevogel and throw him into it. But when she came in,
and went to the beds, both the children were gone. Then she was terribly
alarmed, and she said to herself: ‘What shall I say now when the
forester comes home and sees that the children are gone? They must be
followed instantly to get them back again.’

Then the cook sent three servants after them, who were to run and
overtake the children. The children, however, were sitting outside the
forest, and when they saw from afar the three servants running, Lina
said to Fundevogel: ‘Never leave me, and I will never leave you.’
Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now, nor ever.’ Then said Lina: ‘Do you become
a rose-tree, and I the rose upon it.’ When the three servants came to
the forest, nothing was there but a rose-tree and one rose on it, but
the children were nowhere. Then said they: ‘There is nothing to be done
here,’ and they went home and told the cook that they had seen nothing
in the forest but a little rose-bush with one rose on it. Then the
old cook scolded and said: ‘You simpletons, you should have cut the
rose-bush in two, and have broken off the rose and brought it home with
you; go, and do it at once.’ They had therefore to go out and look for
the second time. The children, however, saw them coming from a distance.
Then Lina said: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will never leave
you.’ Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now; nor ever.’ Said Lina: ‘Then do you
become a church, and I’ll be the chandelier in it.’ So when the three
servants came, nothing was there but a church, with a chandelier in
it. They said therefore to each other: ‘What can we do here, let us go
home.’ When they got home, the cook asked if they had not found them;
so they said no, they had found nothing but a church, and there was a
chandelier in it. And the cook scolded them and said: ‘You fools! why
did you not pull the church to pieces, and bring the chandelier home
with you?’ And now the old cook herself got on her legs, and went with
the three servants in pursuit of the children. The children, however,
saw from afar that the three servants were coming, and the cook waddling
after them. Then said Lina: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will
never leave you.’ Then said Fundevogel: ‘Neither now, nor ever.’
Said Lina: ‘Be a fishpond, and I will be the duck upon it.’ The cook,
however, came up to them, and when she saw the pond she lay down by it,
and was about to drink it up. But the duck swam quickly to her, seized
her head in its beak and drew her into the water, and there the old
witch had to drown. Then the children went home together, and were
heartily delighted, and if they have not died, they are living still.




THE VALIANT LITTLE TAILOR

One summer’s morning a little tailor was sitting on his table by the
window; he was in good spirits, and sewed with all his might. Then came
a peasant woman down the street crying: ‘Good jams, cheap! Good jams,
cheap!’ This rang pleasantly in the tailor’s ears; he stretched his
delicate head out of the window, and called: ‘Come up here, dear woman;
here you will get rid of your goods.’ The woman came up the three steps
to the tailor with her heavy basket, and he made her unpack all the pots
for him. He inspected each one, lifted it up, put his nose to it, and
at length said: ‘The jam seems to me to be good, so weigh me out four
ounces, dear woman, and if it is a quarter of a pound that is of no
consequence.’ The woman who had hoped to find a good sale, gave him
what he desired, but went away quite angry and grumbling. ‘Now, this jam
shall be blessed by God,’ cried the little tailor, ‘and give me health
and strength’; so he brought the bread out of the cupboard, cut himself
a piece right across the loaf and spread the jam over it. ‘This won’t
taste bitter,’ said he, ‘but I will just finish the jacket before I
take a bite.’ He laid the bread near him, sewed on, and in his joy, made
bigger and bigger stitches. In the meantime the smell of the sweet jam
rose to where the flies were sitting in great numbers, and they were
attracted and descended on it in hosts. ‘Hi! who invited you?’ said the
little tailor, and drove the unbidden guests away. The flies, however,
who understood no German, would not be turned away, but came back
again in ever-increasing companies. The little tailor at last lost all
patience, and drew a piece of cloth from the hole under his work-table,
and saying: ‘Wait, and I will give it to you,’ struck it mercilessly on
them. When he drew it away and counted, there lay before him no fewer
than seven, dead and with legs stretched out. ‘Are you a fellow of that
sort?’ said he, and could not help admiring his own bravery. ‘The whole
town shall know of this!’ And the little tailor hastened to cut himself
a girdle, stitched it, and embroidered on it in large letters: ‘Seven at
one stroke!’ ‘What, the town!’ he continued, ‘the whole world shall hear
of it!’ and his heart wagged with joy like a lamb’s tail. The tailor
put on the girdle, and resolved to go forth into the world, because he
thought his workshop was too small for his valour. Before he went away,
he sought about in the house to see if there was anything which he could
take with him; however, he found nothing but an old cheese, and that
he put in his pocket. In front of the door he observed a bird which
had caught itself in the thicket. It had to go into his pocket with the
cheese. Now he took to the road boldly, and as he was light and nimble,
he felt no fatigue. The road led him up a mountain, and when he had
reached the highest point of it, there sat a powerful giant looking
peacefully about him. The little tailor went bravely up, spoke to him,
and said: ‘Good day, comrade, so you are sitting there overlooking the
wide-spread world! I am just on my way thither, and want to try my luck.
Have you any inclination to go with me?’ The giant looked contemptuously
at the tailor, and said: ‘You ragamuffin! You miserable creature!’

‘Oh, indeed?’ answered the little tailor, and unbuttoned his coat, and
showed the giant the girdle, ‘there may you read what kind of a man I
am!’ The giant read: ‘Seven at one stroke,’ and thought that they had
been men whom the tailor had killed, and began to feel a little respect
for the tiny fellow. Nevertheless, he wished to try him first, and took
a stone in his hand and squeezed it together so that water dropped out
of it. ‘Do that likewise,’ said the giant, ‘if you have strength.’ ‘Is
that all?’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play with us!’ and put his
hand into his pocket, brought out the soft cheese, and pressed it until
the liquid ran out of it. ‘Faith,’ said he, ‘that was a little better,
wasn’t it?’ The giant did not know what to say, and could not believe it
of the little man. Then the giant picked up a stone and threw it so high
that the eye could scarcely follow it. ‘Now, little mite of a man, do
that likewise,’ ‘Well thrown,’ said the tailor, ‘but after all the stone
came down to earth again; I will throw you one which shall never come
back at all,’ and he put his hand into his pocket, took out the bird,
and threw it into the air. The bird, delighted with its liberty,
rose, flew away and did not come back. ‘How does that shot please you,
comrade?’ asked the tailor. ‘You can certainly throw,’ said the giant,
‘but now we will see if you are able to carry anything properly.’ He
took the little tailor to a mighty oak tree which lay there felled on
the ground, and said: ‘If you are strong enough, help me to carry the
tree out of the forest.’ ‘Readily,’ answered the little man; ‘take you
the trunk on your shoulders, and I will raise up the branches and twigs;
after all, they are the heaviest.’ The giant took the trunk on his
shoulder, but the tailor seated himself on a branch, and the giant, who
could not look round, had to carry away the whole tree, and the little
tailor into the bargain: he behind, was quite merry and happy, and
whistled the song: ‘Three tailors rode forth from the gate,’ as if
carrying the tree were child’s play. The giant, after he had dragged the
heavy burden part of the way, could go no further, and cried: ‘Hark
you, I shall have to let the tree fall!’ The tailor sprang nimbly down,
seized the tree with both arms as if he had been carrying it, and said
to the giant: ‘You are such a great fellow, and yet cannot even carry
the tree!’

They went on together, and as they passed a cherry-tree, the giant laid
hold of the top of the tree where the ripest fruit was hanging, bent it
down, gave it into the tailor’s hand, and bade him eat. But the little
tailor was much too weak to hold the tree, and when the giant let it go,
it sprang back again, and the tailor was tossed into the air with it.
When he had fallen down again without injury, the giant said: ‘What is
this? Have you not strength enough to hold the weak twig?’ ‘There is no
lack of strength,’ answered the little tailor. ‘Do you think that could
be anything to a man who has struck down seven at one blow? I leapt over
the tree because the huntsmen are shooting down there in the thicket.
Jump as I did, if you can do it.’ The giant made the attempt but he
could not get over the tree, and remained hanging in the branches, so
that in this also the tailor kept the upper hand.

The giant said: ‘If you are such a valiant fellow, come with me into our
cavern and spend the night with us.’ The little tailor was willing, and
followed him. When they went into the cave, other giants were sitting
there by the fire, and each of them had a roasted sheep in his hand and
was eating it. The little tailor looked round and thought: ‘It is much
more spacious here than in my workshop.’ The giant showed him a bed, and
said he was to lie down in it and sleep. The bed, however, was too
big for the little tailor; he did not lie down in it, but crept into
a corner. When it was midnight, and the giant thought that the little
tailor was lying in a sound sleep, he got up, took a great iron bar,
cut through the bed with one blow, and thought he had finished off the
grasshopper for good. With the earliest dawn the giants went into the
forest, and had quite forgotten the little tailor, when all at once he
walked up to them quite merrily and boldly. The giants were terrified,
they were afraid that he would strike them all dead, and ran away in a
great hurry.

The little tailor went onwards, always following his own pointed nose.
After he had walked for a long time, he came to the courtyard of a royal
palace, and as he felt weary, he lay down on the grass and fell asleep.
Whilst he lay there, the people came and inspected him on all sides, and
read on his girdle: ‘Seven at one stroke.’ ‘Ah!’ said they, ‘what does
the great warrior want here in the midst of peace? He must be a mighty
lord.’ They went and announced him to the king, and gave it as their
opinion that if war should break out, this would be a weighty and useful
man who ought on no account to be allowed to depart. The counsel pleased
the king, and he sent one of his courtiers to the little tailor to offer
him military service when he awoke. The ambassador remained standing by
the sleeper, waited until he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes,
and then conveyed to him this proposal. ‘For this very reason have
I come here,’ the tailor replied, ‘I am ready to enter the king’s
service.’ He was therefore honourably received, and a special dwelling
was assigned him.

The soldiers, however, were set against the little tailor, and wished
him a thousand miles away. ‘What is to be the end of this?’ they said
among themselves. ‘If we quarrel with him, and he strikes about him,
seven of us will fall at every blow; not one of us can stand against
him.’ They came therefore to a decision, betook themselves in a body to
the king, and begged for their dismissal. ‘We are not prepared,’ said
they, ‘to stay with a man who kills seven at one stroke.’ The king was
sorry that for the sake of one he should lose all his faithful servants,
wished that he had never set eyes on the tailor, and would willingly
have been rid of him again. But he did not venture to give him his
dismissal, for he dreaded lest he should strike him and all his people
dead, and place himself on the royal throne. He thought about it for a
long time, and at last found good counsel. He sent to the little tailor
and caused him to be informed that as he was a great warrior, he had one
request to make to him. In a forest of his country lived two giants,
who caused great mischief with their robbing, murdering, ravaging,
and burning, and no one could approach them without putting himself in
danger of death. If the tailor conquered and killed these two giants, he
would give him his only daughter to wife, and half of his kingdom as a
dowry, likewise one hundred horsemen should go with him to assist him.
‘That would indeed be a fine thing for a man like me!’ thought the
little tailor. ‘One is not offered a beautiful princess and half a
kingdom every day of one’s life!’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘I will soon
subdue the giants, and do not require the help of the hundred horsemen
to do it; he who can hit seven with one blow has no need to be afraid of
two.’

The little tailor went forth, and the hundred horsemen followed him.
When he came to the outskirts of the forest, he said to his followers:
‘Just stay waiting here, I alone will soon finish off the giants.’ Then
he bounded into the forest and looked about right and left. After a
while he perceived both giants. They lay sleeping under a tree, and
snored so that the branches waved up and down. The little tailor, not
idle, gathered two pocketsful of stones, and with these climbed up the
tree. When he was halfway up, he slipped down by a branch, until he sat
just above the sleepers, and then let one stone after another fall on
the breast of one of the giants. For a long time the giant felt nothing,
but at last he awoke, pushed his comrade, and said: ‘Why are you
knocking me?’ ‘You must be dreaming,’ said the other, ‘I am not knocking
you.’ They laid themselves down to sleep again, and then the tailor
threw a stone down on the second. ‘What is the meaning of this?’ cried
the other ‘Why are you pelting me?’ ‘I am not pelting you,’ answered
the first, growling. They disputed about it for a time, but as they were
weary they let the matter rest, and their eyes closed once more. The
little tailor began his game again, picked out the biggest stone, and
threw it with all his might on the breast of the first giant. ‘That
is too bad!’ cried he, and sprang up like a madman, and pushed his
companion against the tree until it shook. The other paid him back in
the same coin, and they got into such a rage that they tore up trees and
belaboured each other so long, that at last they both fell down dead on
the ground at the same time. Then the little tailor leapt down. ‘It is
a lucky thing,’ said he, ‘that they did not tear up the tree on which
I was sitting, or I should have had to sprint on to another like a
squirrel; but we tailors are nimble.’ He drew out his sword and gave
each of them a couple of thrusts in the breast, and then went out to the
horsemen and said: ‘The work is done; I have finished both of them
off, but it was hard work! They tore up trees in their sore need, and
defended themselves with them, but all that is to no purpose when a man
like myself comes, who can kill seven at one blow.’ ‘But are you not
wounded?’ asked the horsemen. ‘You need not concern yourself about
that,’ answered the tailor, ‘they have not bent one hair of mine.’ The
horsemen would not believe him, and rode into the forest; there they
found the giants swimming in their blood, and all round about lay the
torn-up trees.

The little tailor demanded of the king the promised reward; he, however,
repented of his promise, and again bethought himself how he could get
rid of the hero. ‘Before you receive my daughter, and the half of my
kingdom,’ said he to him, ‘you must perform one more heroic deed. In
the forest roams a unicorn which does great harm, and you must catch
it first.’ ‘I fear one unicorn still less than two giants. Seven at one
blow, is my kind of affair.’ He took a rope and an axe with him, went
forth into the forest, and again bade those who were sent with him to
wait outside. He had not long to seek. The unicorn soon came towards
him, and rushed directly on the tailor, as if it would gore him with its
horn without more ado. ‘Softly, softly; it can’t be done as quickly as
that,’ said he, and stood still and waited until the animal was quite
close, and then sprang nimbly behind the tree. The unicorn ran against
the tree with all its strength, and stuck its horn so fast in the trunk
that it had not the strength enough to draw it out again, and thus it
was caught. ‘Now, I have got the bird,’ said the tailor, and came out
from behind the tree and put the rope round its neck, and then with his
axe he hewed the horn out of the tree, and when all was ready he led the
beast away and took it to the king.

The king still would not give him the promised reward, and made a third
demand. Before the wedding the tailor was to catch him a wild boar that
made great havoc in the forest, and the huntsmen should give him their
help. ‘Willingly,’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play!’ He did not
take the huntsmen with him into the forest, and they were well pleased
that he did not, for the wild boar had several times received them in
such a manner that they had no inclination to lie in wait for him. When
the boar perceived the tailor, it ran on him with foaming mouth and
whetted tusks, and was about to throw him to the ground, but the hero
fled and sprang into a chapel which was near and up to the window at
once, and in one bound out again. The boar ran after him, but the tailor
ran round outside and shut the door behind it, and then the raging
beast, which was much too heavy and awkward to leap out of the window,
was caught. The little tailor called the huntsmen thither that they
might see the prisoner with their own eyes. The hero, however, went to
the king, who was now, whether he liked it or not, obliged to keep his
promise, and gave his daughter and the half of his kingdom. Had he known
that it was no warlike hero, but a little tailor who was standing before
him, it would have gone to his heart still more than it did. The wedding
was held with great magnificence and small joy, and out of a tailor a
king was made.

After some time the young queen heard her husband say in his dreams at
night: ‘Boy, make me the doublet, and patch the pantaloons, or else I
will rap the yard-measure over your ears.’ Then she discovered in what
state of life the young lord had been born, and next morning complained
of her wrongs to her father, and begged him to help her to get rid of
her husband, who was nothing else but a tailor. The king comforted her
and said: ‘Leave your bedroom door open this night, and my servants
shall stand outside, and when he has fallen asleep shall go in, bind
him, and take him on board a ship which shall carry him into the wide
world.’ The woman was satisfied with this; but the king’s armour-bearer,
who had heard all, was friendly with the young lord, and informed him of
the whole plot. ‘I’ll put a screw into that business,’ said the little
tailor. At night he went to bed with his wife at the usual time, and
when she thought that he had fallen asleep, she got up, opened the door,
and then lay down again. The little tailor, who was only pretending to
be asleep, began to cry out in a clear voice: ‘Boy, make me the doublet
and patch me the pantaloons, or I will rap the yard-measure over your
ears. I smote seven at one blow. I killed two giants, I brought away one
unicorn, and caught a wild boar, and am I to fear those who are standing
outside the room.’ When these men heard the tailor speaking thus, they
were overcome by a great dread, and ran as if the wild huntsman were
behind them, and none of them would venture anything further against
him. So the little tailor was and remained a king to the end of his
life.




HANSEL AND GRETEL

Hard by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with his wife and his
two children. The boy was called Hansel and the girl Gretel. He had
little to bite and to break, and once when great dearth fell on the
land, he could no longer procure even daily bread. Now when he thought
over this by night in his bed, and tossed about in his anxiety, he
groaned and said to his wife: ‘What is to become of us? How are we
to feed our poor children, when we no longer have anything even for
ourselves?’ ‘I’ll tell you what, husband,’ answered the woman, ‘early
tomorrow morning we will take the children out into the forest to where
it is the thickest; there we will light a fire for them, and give each
of them one more piece of bread, and then we will go to our work and
leave them alone. They will not find the way home again, and we shall be
rid of them.’ ‘No, wife,’ said the man, ‘I will not do that; how can I
bear to leave my children alone in the forest?--the wild animals would
soon come and tear them to pieces.’ ‘O, you fool!’ said she, ‘then we
must all four die of hunger, you may as well plane the planks for our
coffins,’ and she left him no peace until he consented. ‘But I feel very
sorry for the poor children, all the same,’ said the man.

The two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger, and had
heard what their stepmother had said to their father. Gretel wept
bitter tears, and said to Hansel: ‘Now all is over with us.’ ‘Be quiet,
Gretel,’ said Hansel, ‘do not distress yourself, I will soon find a way
to help us.’ And when the old folks had fallen asleep, he got up, put
on his little coat, opened the door below, and crept outside. The moon
shone brightly, and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house
glittered like real silver pennies. Hansel stooped and stuffed the
little pocket of his coat with as many as he could get in. Then he went
back and said to Gretel: ‘Be comforted, dear little sister, and sleep in
peace, God will not forsake us,’ and he lay down again in his bed. When
day dawned, but before the sun had risen, the woman came and awoke the
two children, saying: ‘Get up, you sluggards! we are going into the
forest to fetch wood.’ She gave each a little piece of bread, and said:
‘There is something for your dinner, but do not eat it up before then,
for you will get nothing else.’ Gretel took the bread under her apron,
as Hansel had the pebbles in his pocket. Then they all set out together
on the way to the forest. When they had walked a short time, Hansel
stood still and peeped back at the house, and did so again and again.
His father said: ‘Hansel, what are you looking at there and staying
behind for? Pay attention, and do not forget how to use your legs.’ ‘Ah,
father,’ said Hansel, ‘I am looking at my little white cat, which is
sitting up on the roof, and wants to say goodbye to me.’ The wife said:
‘Fool, that is not your little cat, that is the morning sun which is
shining on the chimneys.’ Hansel, however, had not been looking back at
the cat, but had been constantly throwing one of the white pebble-stones
out of his pocket on the road.

When they had reached the middle of the forest, the father said: ‘Now,
children, pile up some wood, and I will light a fire that you may not
be cold.’ Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood together, as high as a
little hill. The brushwood was lighted, and when the flames were burning
very high, the woman said: ‘Now, children, lay yourselves down by the
fire and rest, we will go into the forest and cut some wood. When we
have done, we will come back and fetch you away.’

Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire, and when noon came, each ate a little
piece of bread, and as they heard the strokes of the wood-axe they
believed that their father was near. It was not the axe, however, but
a branch which he had fastened to a withered tree which the wind was
blowing backwards and forwards. And as they had been sitting such a long
time, their eyes closed with fatigue, and they fell fast asleep. When
at last they awoke, it was already dark night. Gretel began to cry and
said: ‘How are we to get out of the forest now?’ But Hansel comforted
her and said: ‘Just wait a little, until the moon has risen, and then we
will soon find the way.’ And when the full moon had risen, Hansel took
his little sister by the hand, and followed the pebbles which shone like
newly-coined silver pieces, and showed them the way.

They walked the whole night long, and by break of day came once more
to their father’s house. They knocked at the door, and when the woman
opened it and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said: ‘You naughty
children, why have you slept so long in the forest?--we thought you were
never coming back at all!’ The father, however, rejoiced, for it had cut
him to the heart to leave them behind alone.

Not long afterwards, there was once more great dearth throughout the
land, and the children heard their mother saying at night to their
father: ‘Everything is eaten again, we have one half loaf left, and that
is the end. The children must go, we will take them farther into the
wood, so that they will not find their way out again; there is no other
means of saving ourselves!’ The man’s heart was heavy, and he thought:
‘It would be better for you to share the last mouthful with your
children.’ The woman, however, would listen to nothing that he had to
say, but scolded and reproached him. He who says A must say B, likewise,
and as he had yielded the first time, he had to do so a second time
also.

The children, however, were still awake and had heard the conversation.
When the old folks were asleep, Hansel again got up, and wanted to go
out and pick up pebbles as he had done before, but the woman had locked
the door, and Hansel could not get out. Nevertheless he comforted his
little sister, and said: ‘Do not cry, Gretel, go to sleep quietly, the
good God will help us.’

Early in the morning came the woman, and took the children out of their
beds. Their piece of bread was given to them, but it was still smaller
than the time before. On the way into the forest Hansel crumbled his
in his pocket, and often stood still and threw a morsel on the ground.
‘Hansel, why do you stop and look round?’ said the father, ‘go on.’ ‘I
am looking back at my little pigeon which is sitting on the roof, and
wants to say goodbye to me,’ answered Hansel. ‘Fool!’ said the woman,
‘that is not your little pigeon, that is the morning sun that is shining
on the chimney.’ Hansel, however little by little, threw all the crumbs
on the path.

The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, where they had
never in their lives been before. Then a great fire was again made, and
the mother said: ‘Just sit there, you children, and when you are tired
you may sleep a little; we are going into the forest to cut wood, and in
the evening when we are done, we will come and fetch you away.’ When
it was noon, Gretel shared her piece of bread with Hansel, who had
scattered his by the way. Then they fell asleep and evening passed, but
no one came to the poor children. They did not awake until it was dark
night, and Hansel comforted his little sister and said: ‘Just wait,
Gretel, until the moon rises, and then we shall see the crumbs of bread
which I have strewn about, they will show us our way home again.’ When
the moon came they set out, but they found no crumbs, for the many
thousands of birds which fly about in the woods and fields had picked
them all up. Hansel said to Gretel: ‘We shall soon find the way,’ but
they did not find it. They walked the whole night and all the next day
too from morning till evening, but they did not get out of the forest,
and were very hungry, for they had nothing to eat but two or three
berries, which grew on the ground. And as they were so weary that their
legs would carry them no longer, they lay down beneath a tree and fell
asleep.

It was now three mornings since they had left their father’s house. They
began to walk again, but they always came deeper into the forest, and if
help did not come soon, they must die of hunger and weariness. When it
was mid-day, they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a bough,
which sang so delightfully that they stood still and listened to it. And
when its song was over, it spread its wings and flew away before them,
and they followed it until they reached a little house, on the roof of
which it alighted; and when they approached the little house they saw
that it was built of bread and covered with cakes, but that the windows
were of clear sugar. ‘We will set to work on that,’ said Hansel, ‘and
have a good meal. I will eat a bit of the roof, and you Gretel, can eat
some of the window, it will taste sweet.’ Hansel reached up above, and
broke off a little of the roof to try how it tasted, and Gretel leant
against the window and nibbled at the panes. Then a soft voice cried
from the parlour:

 ‘Nibble, nibble, gnaw,
  Who is nibbling at my little house?’

The children answered:

 ‘The wind, the wind,
  The heaven-born wind,’

and went on eating without disturbing themselves. Hansel, who liked the
taste of the roof, tore down a great piece of it, and Gretel pushed out
the whole of one round window-pane, sat down, and enjoyed herself with
it. Suddenly the door opened, and a woman as old as the hills, who
supported herself on crutches, came creeping out. Hansel and Gretel were
so terribly frightened that they let fall what they had in their
hands. The old woman, however, nodded her head, and said: ‘Oh, you dear
children, who has brought you here? do come in, and stay with me. No
harm shall happen to you.’ She took them both by the hand, and led them
into her little house. Then good food was set before them, milk and
pancakes, with sugar, apples, and nuts. Afterwards two pretty little
beds were covered with clean white linen, and Hansel and Gretel lay down
in them, and thought they were in heaven.

The old woman had only pretended to be so kind; she was in reality
a wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and had only built the
little house of bread in order to entice them there. When a child fell
into her power, she killed it, cooked and ate it, and that was a feast
day with her. Witches have red eyes, and cannot see far, but they have
a keen scent like the beasts, and are aware when human beings draw near.
When Hansel and Gretel came into her neighbourhood, she laughed with
malice, and said mockingly: ‘I have them, they shall not escape me
again!’ Early in the morning before the children were awake, she was
already up, and when she saw both of them sleeping and looking so
pretty, with their plump and rosy cheeks she muttered to herself: ‘That
will be a dainty mouthful!’ Then she seized Hansel with her shrivelled
hand, carried him into a little stable, and locked him in behind a
grated door. Scream as he might, it would not help him. Then she went to
Gretel, shook her till she awoke, and cried: ‘Get up, lazy thing, fetch
some water, and cook something good for your brother, he is in the
stable outside, and is to be made fat. When he is fat, I will eat him.’
Gretel began to weep bitterly, but it was all in vain, for she was
forced to do what the wicked witch commanded.

And now the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, but Gretel got nothing
but crab-shells. Every morning the woman crept to the little stable, and
cried: ‘Hansel, stretch out your finger that I may feel if you will soon
be fat.’ Hansel, however, stretched out a little bone to her, and
the old woman, who had dim eyes, could not see it, and thought it was
Hansel’s finger, and was astonished that there was no way of fattening
him. When four weeks had gone by, and Hansel still remained thin, she
was seized with impatience and would not wait any longer. ‘Now, then,
Gretel,’ she cried to the girl, ‘stir yourself, and bring some water.
Let Hansel be fat or lean, tomorrow I will kill him, and cook him.’ Ah,
how the poor little sister did lament when she had to fetch the water,
and how her tears did flow down her cheeks! ‘Dear God, do help us,’ she
cried. ‘If the wild beasts in the forest had but devoured us, we should
at any rate have died together.’ ‘Just keep your noise to yourself,’
said the old woman, ‘it won’t help you at all.’

Early in the morning, Gretel had to go out and hang up the cauldron with
the water, and light the fire. ‘We will bake first,’ said the old woman,
‘I have already heated the oven, and kneaded the dough.’ She pushed poor
Gretel out to the oven, from which flames of fire were already darting.
‘Creep in,’ said the witch, ‘and see if it is properly heated, so that
we can put the bread in.’ And once Gretel was inside, she intended to
shut the oven and let her bake in it, and then she would eat her, too.
But Gretel saw what she had in mind, and said: ‘I do not know how I am
to do it; how do I get in?’ ‘Silly goose,’ said the old woman. ‘The door
is big enough; just look, I can get in myself!’ and she crept up and
thrust her head into the oven. Then Gretel gave her a push that drove
her far into it, and shut the iron door, and fastened the bolt. Oh! then
she began to howl quite horribly, but Gretel ran away and the godless
witch was miserably burnt to death.

Gretel, however, ran like lightning to Hansel, opened his little stable,
and cried: ‘Hansel, we are saved! The old witch is dead!’ Then Hansel
sprang like a bird from its cage when the door is opened. How they did
rejoice and embrace each other, and dance about and kiss each other! And
as they had no longer any need to fear her, they went into the witch’s
house, and in every corner there stood chests full of pearls and jewels.
‘These are far better than pebbles!’ said Hansel, and thrust into his
pockets whatever could be got in, and Gretel said: ‘I, too, will take
something home with me,’ and filled her pinafore full. ‘But now we must
be off,’ said Hansel, ‘that we may get out of the witch’s forest.’

When they had walked for two hours, they came to a great stretch of
water. ‘We cannot cross,’ said Hansel, ‘I see no foot-plank, and no
bridge.’ ‘And there is also no ferry,’ answered Gretel, ‘but a white
duck is swimming there: if I ask her, she will help us over.’ Then she
cried:

 ‘Little duck, little duck, dost thou see,
  Hansel and Gretel are waiting for thee?
  There’s never a plank, or bridge in sight,
  Take us across on thy back so white.’

The duck came to them, and Hansel seated himself on its back, and told
his sister to sit by him. ‘No,’ replied Gretel, ‘that will be too heavy
for the little duck; she shall take us across, one after the other.’ The
good little duck did so, and when they were once safely across and had
walked for a short time, the forest seemed to be more and more familiar
to them, and at length they saw from afar their father’s house. Then
they began to run, rushed into the parlour, and threw themselves round
their father’s neck. The man had not known one happy hour since he had
left the children in the forest; the woman, however, was dead. Gretel
emptied her pinafore until pearls and precious stones ran about the
room, and Hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to
add to them. Then all anxiety was at an end, and they lived together
in perfect happiness. My tale is done, there runs a mouse; whosoever
catches it, may make himself a big fur cap out of it.




THE MOUSE, THE BIRD, AND THE SAUSAGE

Once upon a time, a mouse, a bird, and a sausage, entered into
partnership and set up house together. For a long time all went well;
they lived in great comfort, and prospered so far as to be able to add
considerably to their stores. The bird’s duty was to fly daily into the
wood and bring in fuel; the mouse fetched the water, and the sausage saw
to the cooking.

When people are too well off they always begin to long for something
new. And so it came to pass, that the bird, while out one day, met a
fellow bird, to whom he boastfully expatiated on the excellence of his
household arrangements. But the other bird sneered at him for being a
poor simpleton, who did all the hard work, while the other two stayed
at home and had a good time of it. For, when the mouse had made the fire
and fetched in the water, she could retire into her little room and rest
until it was time to set the table. The sausage had only to watch the
pot to see that the food was properly cooked, and when it was near
dinner-time, he just threw himself into the broth, or rolled in and out
among the vegetables three or four times, and there they were, buttered,
and salted, and ready to be served. Then, when the bird came home and
had laid aside his burden, they sat down to table, and when they had
finished their meal, they could sleep their fill till the following
morning: and that was really a very delightful life.

Influenced by those remarks, the bird next morning refused to bring in
the wood, telling the others that he had been their servant long enough,
and had been a fool into the bargain, and that it was now time to make a
change, and to try some other way of arranging the work. Beg and pray
as the mouse and the sausage might, it was of no use; the bird remained
master of the situation, and the venture had to be made. They therefore
drew lots, and it fell to the sausage to bring in the wood, to the mouse
to cook, and to the bird to fetch the water.

And now what happened? The sausage started in search of wood, the bird
made the fire, and the mouse put on the pot, and then these two waited
till the sausage returned with the fuel for the following day. But the
sausage remained so long away, that they became uneasy, and the bird
flew out to meet him. He had not flown far, however, when he came across
a dog who, having met the sausage, had regarded him as his legitimate
booty, and so seized and swallowed him. The bird complained to the dog
of this bare-faced robbery, but nothing he said was of any avail, for
the dog answered that he found false credentials on the sausage, and
that was the reason his life had been forfeited.

He picked up the wood, and flew sadly home, and told the mouse all he
had seen and heard. They were both very unhappy, but agreed to make the
best of things and to remain with one another.

So now the bird set the table, and the mouse looked after the food and,
wishing to prepare it in the same way as the sausage, by rolling in and
out among the vegetables to salt and butter them, she jumped into the
pot; but she stopped short long before she reached the bottom, having
already parted not only with her skin and hair, but also with life.

Presently the bird came in and wanted to serve up the dinner, but he
could nowhere see the cook. In his alarm and flurry, he threw the wood
here and there about the floor, called and searched, but no cook was to
be found. Then some of the wood that had been carelessly thrown down,
caught fire and began to blaze. The bird hastened to fetch some water,
but his pail fell into the well, and he after it, and as he was unable
to recover himself, he was drowned.




MOTHER HOLLE

Once upon a time there was a widow who had two daughters; one of them
was beautiful and industrious, the other ugly and lazy. The mother,
however, loved the ugly and lazy one best, because she was her own
daughter, and so the other, who was only her stepdaughter, was made
to do all the work of the house, and was quite the Cinderella of the
family. Her stepmother sent her out every day to sit by the well in
the high road, there to spin until she made her fingers bleed. Now it
chanced one day that some blood fell on to the spindle, and as the girl
stopped over the well to wash it off, the spindle suddenly sprang out
of her hand and fell into the well. She ran home crying to tell of her
misfortune, but her stepmother spoke harshly to her, and after giving
her a violent scolding, said unkindly, ‘As you have let the spindle fall
into the well you may go yourself and fetch it out.’

The girl went back to the well not knowing what to do, and at last in
her distress she jumped into the water after the spindle.

She remembered nothing more until she awoke and found herself in a
beautiful meadow, full of sunshine, and with countless flowers blooming
in every direction.

She walked over the meadow, and presently she came upon a baker’s oven
full of bread, and the loaves cried out to her, ‘Take us out, take us
out, or alas! we shall be burnt to a cinder; we were baked through long
ago.’ So she took the bread-shovel and drew them all out.

She went on a little farther, till she came to a tree full of apples.
‘Shake me, shake me, I pray,’ cried the tree; ‘my apples, one and all,
are ripe.’ So she shook the tree, and the apples came falling down upon
her like rain; but she continued shaking until there was not a single
apple left upon it. Then she carefully gathered the apples together in a
heap and walked on again.

The next thing she came to was a little house, and there she saw an old
woman looking out, with such large teeth, that she was terrified, and
turned to run away. But the old woman called after her, ‘What are you
afraid of, dear child? Stay with me; if you will do the work of my house
properly for me, I will make you very happy. You must be very careful,
however, to make my bed in the right way, for I wish you always to shake
it thoroughly, so that the feathers fly about; then they say, down there
in the world, that it is snowing; for I am Mother Holle.’ The old woman
spoke so kindly, that the girl summoned up courage and agreed to enter
into her service.

She took care to do everything according to the old woman’s bidding and
every time she made the bed she shook it with all her might, so that the
feathers flew about like so many snowflakes. The old woman was as good
as her word: she never spoke angrily to her, and gave her roast and
boiled meats every day.

So she stayed on with Mother Holle for some time, and then she began
to grow unhappy. She could not at first tell why she felt sad, but she
became conscious at last of great longing to go home; then she knew she
was homesick, although she was a thousand times better off with Mother
Holle than with her mother and sister. After waiting awhile, she went
to Mother Holle and said, ‘I am so homesick, that I cannot stay with
you any longer, for although I am so happy here, I must return to my own
people.’

Then Mother Holle said, ‘I am pleased that you should want to go back
to your own people, and as you have served me so well and faithfully, I
will take you home myself.’

Thereupon she led the girl by the hand up to a broad gateway. The gate
was opened, and as the girl passed through, a shower of gold fell upon
her, and the gold clung to her, so that she was covered with it from
head to foot.

‘That is a reward for your industry,’ said Mother Holle, and as she
spoke she handed her the spindle which she had dropped into the well.

The gate was then closed, and the girl found herself back in the old
world close to her mother’s house. As she entered the courtyard, the
cock who was perched on the well, called out:

 ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  Your golden daughter’s come back to you.’

Then she went in to her mother and sister, and as she was so richly
covered with gold, they gave her a warm welcome. She related to them
all that had happened, and when the mother heard how she had come by her
great riches, she thought she should like her ugly, lazy daughter to go
and try her fortune. So she made the sister go and sit by the well
and spin, and the girl pricked her finger and thrust her hand into a
thorn-bush, so that she might drop some blood on to the spindle; then
she threw it into the well, and jumped in herself.

Like her sister she awoke in the beautiful meadow, and walked over it
till she came to the oven. ‘Take us out, take us out, or alas! we shall
be burnt to a cinder; we were baked through long ago,’ cried the loaves
as before. But the lazy girl answered, ‘Do you think I am going to dirty
my hands for you?’ and walked on.

Presently she came to the apple-tree. ‘Shake me, shake me, I pray; my
apples, one and all, are ripe,’ it cried. But she only answered, ‘A nice
thing to ask me to do, one of the apples might fall on my head,’ and
passed on.

At last she came to Mother Holle’s house, and as she had heard all about
the large teeth from her sister, she was not afraid of them, and engaged
herself without delay to the old woman.

The first day she was very obedient and industrious, and exerted herself
to please Mother Holle, for she thought of the gold she should get in
return. The next day, however, she began to dawdle over her work, and
the third day she was more idle still; then she began to lie in bed in
the mornings and refused to get up. Worse still, she neglected to
make the old woman’s bed properly, and forgot to shake it so that the
feathers might fly about. So Mother Holle very soon got tired of her,
and told her she might go. The lazy girl was delighted at this, and
thought to herself, ‘The gold will soon be mine.’ Mother Holle led her,
as she had led her sister, to the broad gateway; but as she was passing
through, instead of the shower of gold, a great bucketful of pitch came
pouring over her.

‘That is in return for your services,’ said the old woman, and she shut
the gate.

So the lazy girl had to go home covered with pitch, and the cock on the
well called out as she saw her:

 ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  Your dirty daughter’s come back to you.’

But, try what she would, she could not get the pitch off and it stuck to
her as long as she lived.




LITTLE RED-CAP [LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD]

Once upon a time there was a dear little girl who was loved by everyone
who looked at her, but most of all by her grandmother, and there was
nothing that she would not have given to the child. Once she gave her a
little cap of red velvet, which suited her so well that she would never
wear anything else; so she was always called ‘Little Red-Cap.’

One day her mother said to her: ‘Come, Little Red-Cap, here is a piece
of cake and a bottle of wine; take them to your grandmother, she is ill
and weak, and they will do her good. Set out before it gets hot, and
when you are going, walk nicely and quietly and do not run off the path,
or you may fall and break the bottle, and then your grandmother will
get nothing; and when you go into her room, don’t forget to say, “Good
morning”, and don’t peep into every corner before you do it.’

‘I will take great care,’ said Little Red-Cap to her mother, and gave
her hand on it.

The grandmother lived out in the wood, half a league from the village,
and just as Little Red-Cap entered the wood, a wolf met her. Red-Cap
did not know what a wicked creature he was, and was not at all afraid of
him.

‘Good day, Little Red-Cap,’ said he.

‘Thank you kindly, wolf.’

‘Whither away so early, Little Red-Cap?’

‘To my grandmother’s.’

‘What have you got in your apron?’

‘Cake and wine; yesterday was baking-day, so poor sick grandmother is to
have something good, to make her stronger.’

‘Where does your grandmother live, Little Red-Cap?’

‘A good quarter of a league farther on in the wood; her house stands
under the three large oak-trees, the nut-trees are just below; you
surely must know it,’ replied Little Red-Cap.

The wolf thought to himself: ‘What a tender young creature! what a nice
plump mouthful--she will be better to eat than the old woman. I must
act craftily, so as to catch both.’ So he walked for a short time by
the side of Little Red-Cap, and then he said: ‘See, Little Red-Cap, how
pretty the flowers are about here--why do you not look round? I believe,
too, that you do not hear how sweetly the little birds are singing; you
walk gravely along as if you were going to school, while everything else
out here in the wood is merry.’

Little Red-Cap raised her eyes, and when she saw the sunbeams dancing
here and there through the trees, and pretty flowers growing everywhere,
she thought: ‘Suppose I take grandmother a fresh nosegay; that would
please her too. It is so early in the day that I shall still get there
in good time’; and so she ran from the path into the wood to look for
flowers. And whenever she had picked one, she fancied that she saw a
still prettier one farther on, and ran after it, and so got deeper and
deeper into the wood.

Meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother’s house and knocked
at the door.

‘Who is there?’

‘Little Red-Cap,’ replied the wolf. ‘She is bringing cake and wine; open
the door.’

‘Lift the latch,’ called out the grandmother, ‘I am too weak, and cannot
get up.’

The wolf lifted the latch, the door sprang open, and without saying a
word he went straight to the grandmother’s bed, and devoured her. Then
he put on her clothes, dressed himself in her cap laid himself in bed
and drew the curtains.

Little Red-Cap, however, had been running about picking flowers,
and when she had gathered so many that she could carry no more, she
remembered her grandmother, and set out on the way to her.

She was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open, and when she
went into the room, she had such a strange feeling that she said to
herself: ‘Oh dear! how uneasy I feel today, and at other times I like
being with grandmother so much.’ She called out: ‘Good morning,’ but
received no answer; so she went to the bed and drew back the curtains.
There lay her grandmother with her cap pulled far over her face, and
looking very strange.

‘Oh! grandmother,’ she said, ‘what big ears you have!’

‘The better to hear you with, my child,’ was the reply.

‘But, grandmother, what big eyes you have!’ she said.

‘The better to see you with, my dear.’

‘But, grandmother, what large hands you have!’

‘The better to hug you with.’

‘Oh! but, grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have!’

‘The better to eat you with!’

And scarcely had the wolf said this, than with one bound he was out of
bed and swallowed up Red-Cap.

When the wolf had appeased his appetite, he lay down again in the bed,
fell asleep and began to snore very loud. The huntsman was just passing
the house, and thought to himself: ‘How the old woman is snoring! I must
just see if she wants anything.’ So he went into the room, and when he
came to the bed, he saw that the wolf was lying in it. ‘Do I find you
here, you old sinner!’ said he. ‘I have long sought you!’ Then just as
he was going to fire at him, it occurred to him that the wolf might have
devoured the grandmother, and that she might still be saved, so he did
not fire, but took a pair of scissors, and began to cut open the stomach
of the sleeping wolf. When he had made two snips, he saw the little
Red-Cap shining, and then he made two snips more, and the little girl
sprang out, crying: ‘Ah, how frightened I have been! How dark it was
inside the wolf’; and after that the aged grandmother came out alive
also, but scarcely able to breathe. Red-Cap, however, quickly fetched
great stones with which they filled the wolf’s belly, and when he awoke,
he wanted to run away, but the stones were so heavy that he collapsed at
once, and fell dead.

Then all three were delighted. The huntsman drew off the wolf’s skin and
went home with it; the grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine which
Red-Cap had brought, and revived, but Red-Cap thought to herself: ‘As
long as I live, I will never by myself leave the path, to run into the
wood, when my mother has forbidden me to do so.’




It also related that once when Red-Cap was again taking cakes to the old
grandmother, another wolf spoke to her, and tried to entice her from the
path. Red-Cap, however, was on her guard, and went straight forward on
her way, and told her grandmother that she had met the wolf, and that he
had said ‘good morning’ to her, but with such a wicked look in his eyes,
that if they had not been on the public road she was certain he would
have eaten her up. ‘Well,’ said the grandmother, ‘we will shut the door,
that he may not come in.’ Soon afterwards the wolf knocked, and cried:
‘Open the door, grandmother, I am Little Red-Cap, and am bringing you
some cakes.’ But they did not speak, or open the door, so the grey-beard
stole twice or thrice round the house, and at last jumped on the roof,
intending to wait until Red-Cap went home in the evening, and then to
steal after her and devour her in the darkness. But the grandmother
saw what was in his thoughts. In front of the house was a great stone
trough, so she said to the child: ‘Take the pail, Red-Cap; I made some
sausages yesterday, so carry the water in which I boiled them to the
trough.’ Red-Cap carried until the great trough was quite full. Then the
smell of the sausages reached the wolf, and he sniffed and peeped down,
and at last stretched out his neck so far that he could no longer keep
his footing and began to slip, and slipped down from the roof straight
into the great trough, and was drowned. But Red-Cap went joyously home,
and no one ever did anything to harm her again.




THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM

There was once a miller who had one beautiful daughter, and as she was
grown up, he was anxious that she should be well married and provided
for. He said to himself, ‘I will give her to the first suitable man who
comes and asks for her hand.’ Not long after a suitor appeared, and as
he appeared to be very rich and the miller could see nothing in him with
which to find fault, he betrothed his daughter to him. But the girl did
not care for the man as a girl ought to care for her betrothed husband.
She did not feel that she could trust him, and she could not look at him
nor think of him without an inward shudder. One day he said to her, ‘You
have not yet paid me a visit, although we have been betrothed for some
time.’ ‘I do not know where your house is,’ she answered. ‘My house is
out there in the dark forest,’ he said. She tried to excuse herself by
saying that she would not be able to find the way thither. Her betrothed
only replied, ‘You must come and see me next Sunday; I have already
invited guests for that day, and that you may not mistake the way, I
will strew ashes along the path.’

When Sunday came, and it was time for the girl to start, a feeling of
dread came over her which she could not explain, and that she might
be able to find her path again, she filled her pockets with peas and
lentils to sprinkle on the ground as she went along. On reaching the
entrance to the forest she found the path strewed with ashes, and these
she followed, throwing down some peas on either side of her at every
step she took. She walked the whole day until she came to the deepest,
darkest part of the forest. There she saw a lonely house, looking so
grim and mysterious, that it did not please her at all. She stepped
inside, but not a soul was to be seen, and a great silence reigned
throughout. Suddenly a voice cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

The girl looked up and saw that the voice came from a bird hanging in a
cage on the wall. Again it cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

The girl passed on, going from room to room of the house, but they were
all empty, and still she saw no one. At last she came to the cellar,
and there sat a very, very old woman, who could not keep her head from
shaking. ‘Can you tell me,’ asked the girl, ‘if my betrothed husband
lives here?’

‘Ah, you poor child,’ answered the old woman, ‘what a place for you to
come to! This is a murderers’ den. You think yourself a promised bride,
and that your marriage will soon take place, but it is with death that
you will keep your marriage feast. Look, do you see that large cauldron
of water which I am obliged to keep on the fire! As soon as they have
you in their power they will kill you without mercy, and cook and eat
you, for they are eaters of men. If I did not take pity on you and save
you, you would be lost.’

Thereupon the old woman led her behind a large cask, which quite hid her
from view. ‘Keep as still as a mouse,’ she said; ‘do not move or speak,
or it will be all over with you. Tonight, when the robbers are
all asleep, we will flee together. I have long been waiting for an
opportunity to escape.’

The words were hardly out of her mouth when the godless crew returned,
dragging another young girl along with them. They were all drunk, and
paid no heed to her cries and lamentations. They gave her wine to drink,
three glasses full, one of white wine, one of red, and one of yellow,
and with that her heart gave way and she died. Then they tore off her
dainty clothing, laid her on a table, and cut her beautiful body into
pieces, and sprinkled salt upon it.

The poor betrothed girl crouched trembling and shuddering behind the
cask, for she saw what a terrible fate had been intended for her by
the robbers. One of them now noticed a gold ring still remaining on
the little finger of the murdered girl, and as he could not draw it off
easily, he took a hatchet and cut off the finger; but the finger sprang
into the air, and fell behind the cask into the lap of the girl who was
hiding there. The robber took a light and began looking for it, but he
could not find it. ‘Have you looked behind the large cask?’ said one of
the others. But the old woman called out, ‘Come and eat your suppers,
and let the thing be till tomorrow; the finger won’t run away.’

‘The old woman is right,’ said the robbers, and they ceased looking for
the finger and sat down.

The old woman then mixed a sleeping draught with their wine, and before
long they were all lying on the floor of the cellar, fast asleep and
snoring. As soon as the girl was assured of this, she came from behind
the cask. She was obliged to step over the bodies of the sleepers, who
were lying close together, and every moment she was filled with renewed
dread lest she should awaken them. But God helped her, so that she
passed safely over them, and then she and the old woman went upstairs,
opened the door, and hastened as fast as they could from the murderers’
den. They found the ashes scattered by the wind, but the peas and
lentils had sprouted, and grown sufficiently above the ground, to guide
them in the moonlight along the path. All night long they walked, and it
was morning before they reached the mill. Then the girl told her father
all that had happened.

The day came that had been fixed for the marriage. The bridegroom
arrived and also a large company of guests, for the miller had taken
care to invite all his friends and relations. As they sat at the feast,
each guest in turn was asked to tell a tale; the bride sat still and did
not say a word.

‘And you, my love,’ said the bridegroom, turning to her, ‘is there no
tale you know? Tell us something.’

‘I will tell you a dream, then,’ said the bride. ‘I went alone through a
forest and came at last to a house; not a soul could I find within, but
a bird that was hanging in a cage on the wall cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

and again a second time it said these words.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘I went on through the house from room to room, but they were all empty,
and everything was so grim and mysterious. At last I went down to the
cellar, and there sat a very, very old woman, who could not keep her
head still. I asked her if my betrothed lived here, and she answered,
“Ah, you poor child, you are come to a murderers’ den; your betrothed
does indeed live here, but he will kill you without mercy and afterwards
cook and eat you.”’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘The old woman hid me behind a large cask, and scarcely had she done
this when the robbers returned home, dragging a young girl along with
them. They gave her three kinds of wine to drink, white, red, and
yellow, and with that she died.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘Then they tore off her dainty clothing, and cut her beautiful body into
pieces and sprinkled salt upon it.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘And one of the robbers saw that there was a gold ring still left on her
finger, and as it was difficult to draw off, he took a hatchet and cut
off her finger; but the finger sprang into the air and fell behind the
great cask into my lap. And here is the finger with the ring.’ And
with these words the bride drew forth the finger and shewed it to the
assembled guests.

The bridegroom, who during this recital had grown deadly pale, up and
tried to escape, but the guests seized him and held him fast. They
delivered him up to justice, and he and all his murderous band were
condemned to death for their wicked deeds.




TOM THUMB

A poor woodman sat in his cottage one night, smoking his pipe by the
fireside, while his wife sat by his side spinning. ‘How lonely it is,
wife,’ said he, as he puffed out a long curl of smoke, ‘for you and me
to sit here by ourselves, without any children to play about and amuse
us while other people seem so happy and merry with their children!’
‘What you say is very true,’ said the wife, sighing, and turning round
her wheel; ‘how happy should I be if I had but one child! If it were
ever so small--nay, if it were no bigger than my thumb--I should be very
happy, and love it dearly.’ Now--odd as you may think it--it came to
pass that this good woman’s wish was fulfilled, just in the very way she
had wished it; for, not long afterwards, she had a little boy, who was
quite healthy and strong, but was not much bigger than my thumb. So
they said, ‘Well, we cannot say we have not got what we wished for, and,
little as he is, we will love him dearly.’ And they called him Thomas
Thumb.

They gave him plenty of food, yet for all they could do he never grew
bigger, but kept just the same size as he had been when he was born.
Still, his eyes were sharp and sparkling, and he soon showed himself to
be a clever little fellow, who always knew well what he was about.

One day, as the woodman was getting ready to go into the wood to cut
fuel, he said, ‘I wish I had someone to bring the cart after me, for I
want to make haste.’ ‘Oh, father,’ cried Tom, ‘I will take care of that;
the cart shall be in the wood by the time you want it.’ Then the woodman
laughed, and said, ‘How can that be? you cannot reach up to the horse’s
bridle.’ ‘Never mind that, father,’ said Tom; ‘if my mother will only
harness the horse, I will get into his ear and tell him which way to
go.’ ‘Well,’ said the father, ‘we will try for once.’

When the time came the mother harnessed the horse to the cart, and put
Tom into his ear; and as he sat there the little man told the beast how
to go, crying out, ‘Go on!’ and ‘Stop!’ as he wanted: and thus the horse
went on just as well as if the woodman had driven it himself into the
wood. It happened that as the horse was going a little too fast, and Tom
was calling out, ‘Gently! gently!’ two strangers came up. ‘What an odd
thing that is!’ said one: ‘there is a cart going along, and I hear a
carter talking to the horse, but yet I can see no one.’ ‘That is queer,
indeed,’ said the other; ‘let us follow the cart, and see where it
goes.’ So they went on into the wood, till at last they came to the
place where the woodman was. Then Tom Thumb, seeing his father, cried
out, ‘See, father, here I am with the cart, all right and safe! now take
me down!’ So his father took hold of the horse with one hand, and with
the other took his son out of the horse’s ear, and put him down upon a
straw, where he sat as merry as you please.

The two strangers were all this time looking on, and did not know what
to say for wonder. At last one took the other aside, and said, ‘That
little urchin will make our fortune, if we can get him, and carry him
about from town to town as a show; we must buy him.’ So they went up to
the woodman, and asked him what he would take for the little man. ‘He
will be better off,’ said they, ‘with us than with you.’ ‘I won’t sell
him at all,’ said the father; ‘my own flesh and blood is dearer to me
than all the silver and gold in the world.’ But Tom, hearing of the
bargain they wanted to make, crept up his father’s coat to his shoulder
and whispered in his ear, ‘Take the money, father, and let them have me;
I’ll soon come back to you.’

So the woodman at last said he would sell Tom to the strangers for a
large piece of gold, and they paid the price. ‘Where would you like to
sit?’ said one of them. ‘Oh, put me on the rim of your hat; that will be
a nice gallery for me; I can walk about there and see the country as we
go along.’ So they did as he wished; and when Tom had taken leave of his
father they took him away with them.

They journeyed on till it began to be dusky, and then the little man
said, ‘Let me get down, I’m tired.’ So the man took off his hat, and
put him down on a clod of earth, in a ploughed field by the side of the
road. But Tom ran about amongst the furrows, and at last slipped into
an old mouse-hole. ‘Good night, my masters!’ said he, ‘I’m off! mind and
look sharp after me the next time.’ Then they ran at once to the place,
and poked the ends of their sticks into the mouse-hole, but all in vain;
Tom only crawled farther and farther in; and at last it became quite
dark, so that they were forced to go their way without their prize, as
sulky as could be.

When Tom found they were gone, he came out of his hiding-place. ‘What
dangerous walking it is,’ said he, ‘in this ploughed field! If I were to
fall from one of these great clods, I should undoubtedly break my neck.’
At last, by good luck, he found a large empty snail-shell. ‘This is
lucky,’ said he, ‘I can sleep here very well’; and in he crept.

Just as he was falling asleep, he heard two men passing by, chatting
together; and one said to the other, ‘How can we rob that rich parson’s
house of his silver and gold?’ ‘I’ll tell you!’ cried Tom. ‘What noise
was that?’ said the thief, frightened; ‘I’m sure I heard someone speak.’
They stood still listening, and Tom said, ‘Take me with you, and I’ll
soon show you how to get the parson’s money.’ ‘But where are you?’ said
they. ‘Look about on the ground,’ answered he, ‘and listen where the
sound comes from.’ At last the thieves found him out, and lifted him
up in their hands. ‘You little urchin!’ they said, ‘what can you do for
us?’ ‘Why, I can get between the iron window-bars of the parson’s house,
and throw you out whatever you want.’ ‘That’s a good thought,’ said the
thieves; ‘come along, we shall see what you can do.’

When they came to the parson’s house, Tom slipped through the
window-bars into the room, and then called out as loud as he could bawl,
‘Will you have all that is here?’ At this the thieves were frightened,
and said, ‘Softly, softly! Speak low, that you may not awaken anybody.’
But Tom seemed as if he did not understand them, and bawled out again,
‘How much will you have? Shall I throw it all out?’ Now the cook lay in
the next room; and hearing a noise she raised herself up in her bed and
listened. Meantime the thieves were frightened, and ran off a little
way; but at last they plucked up their hearts, and said, ‘The little
urchin is only trying to make fools of us.’ So they came back and
whispered softly to him, saying, ‘Now let us have no more of your
roguish jokes; but throw us out some of the money.’ Then Tom called out
as loud as he could, ‘Very well! hold your hands! here it comes.’

The cook heard this quite plain, so she sprang out of bed, and ran to
open the door. The thieves ran off as if a wolf was at their tails: and
the maid, having groped about and found nothing, went away for a light.
By the time she came back, Tom had slipped off into the barn; and when
she had looked about and searched every hole and corner, and found
nobody, she went to bed, thinking she must have been dreaming with her
eyes open.

The little man crawled about in the hay-loft, and at last found a snug
place to finish his night’s rest in; so he laid himself down, meaning
to sleep till daylight, and then find his way home to his father and
mother. But alas! how woefully he was undone! what crosses and sorrows
happen to us all in this world! The cook got up early, before daybreak,
to feed the cows; and going straight to the hay-loft, carried away
a large bundle of hay, with the little man in the middle of it, fast
asleep. He still, however, slept on, and did not awake till he found
himself in the mouth of the cow; for the cook had put the hay into the
cow’s rick, and the cow had taken Tom up in a mouthful of it. ‘Good
lack-a-day!’ said he, ‘how came I to tumble into the mill?’ But he soon
found out where he really was; and was forced to have all his wits about
him, that he might not get between the cow’s teeth, and so be crushed to
death. At last down he went into her stomach. ‘It is rather dark,’ said
he; ‘they forgot to build windows in this room to let the sun in; a
candle would be no bad thing.’

Though he made the best of his bad luck, he did not like his quarters at
all; and the worst of it was, that more and more hay was always coming
down, and the space left for him became smaller and smaller. At last he
cried out as loud as he could, ‘Don’t bring me any more hay! Don’t bring
me any more hay!’

The maid happened to be just then milking the cow; and hearing someone
speak, but seeing nobody, and yet being quite sure it was the same voice
that she had heard in the night, she was so frightened that she fell off
her stool, and overset the milk-pail. As soon as she could pick herself
up out of the dirt, she ran off as fast as she could to her master the
parson, and said, ‘Sir, sir, the cow is talking!’ But the parson
said, ‘Woman, thou art surely mad!’ However, he went with her into the
cow-house, to try and see what was the matter.

Scarcely had they set foot on the threshold, when Tom called out, ‘Don’t
bring me any more hay!’ Then the parson himself was frightened; and
thinking the cow was surely bewitched, told his man to kill her on the
spot. So the cow was killed, and cut up; and the stomach, in which Tom
lay, was thrown out upon a dunghill.

Tom soon set himself to work to get out, which was not a very easy
task; but at last, just as he had made room to get his head out, fresh
ill-luck befell him. A hungry wolf sprang out, and swallowed up the
whole stomach, with Tom in it, at one gulp, and ran away.

Tom, however, was still not disheartened; and thinking the wolf would
not dislike having some chat with him as he was going along, he called
out, ‘My good friend, I can show you a famous treat.’ ‘Where’s that?’
said the wolf. ‘In such and such a house,’ said Tom, describing his own
father’s house. ‘You can crawl through the drain into the kitchen and
then into the pantry, and there you will find cakes, ham, beef, cold
chicken, roast pig, apple-dumplings, and everything that your heart can
wish.’

The wolf did not want to be asked twice; so that very night he went to
the house and crawled through the drain into the kitchen, and then into
the pantry, and ate and drank there to his heart’s content. As soon as
he had had enough he wanted to get away; but he had eaten so much that
he could not go out by the same way he came in.

This was just what Tom had reckoned upon; and now he began to set up a
great shout, making all the noise he could. ‘Will you be easy?’ said the
wolf; ‘you’ll awaken everybody in the house if you make such a clatter.’
‘What’s that to me?’ said the little man; ‘you have had your frolic, now
I’ve a mind to be merry myself’; and he began, singing and shouting as
loud as he could.

The woodman and his wife, being awakened by the noise, peeped through
a crack in the door; but when they saw a wolf was there, you may well
suppose that they were sadly frightened; and the woodman ran for his
axe, and gave his wife a scythe. ‘Do you stay behind,’ said the woodman,
‘and when I have knocked him on the head you must rip him up with the
scythe.’ Tom heard all this, and cried out, ‘Father, father! I am here,
the wolf has swallowed me.’ And his father said, ‘Heaven be praised! we
have found our dear child again’; and he told his wife not to use the
scythe for fear she should hurt him. Then he aimed a great blow, and
struck the wolf on the head, and killed him on the spot! and when he was
dead they cut open his body, and set Tommy free. ‘Ah!’ said the father,
‘what fears we have had for you!’ ‘Yes, father,’ answered he; ‘I have
travelled all over the world, I think, in one way or other, since we
parted; and now I am very glad to come home and get fresh air again.’
‘Why, where have you been?’ said his father. ‘I have been in a
mouse-hole--and in a snail-shell--and down a cow’s throat--and in the
wolf’s belly; and yet here I am again, safe and sound.’

‘Well,’ said they, ‘you are come back, and we will not sell you again
for all the riches in the world.’

Then they hugged and kissed their dear little son, and gave him plenty
to eat and drink, for he was very hungry; and then they fetched new
clothes for him, for his old ones had been quite spoiled on his journey.
So Master Thumb stayed at home with his father and mother, in peace; for
though he had been so great a traveller, and had done and seen so many
fine things, and was fond enough of telling the whole story, he always
agreed that, after all, there’s no place like HOME!




RUMPELSTILTSKIN

By the side of a wood, in a country a long way off, ran a fine stream
of water; and upon the stream there stood a mill. The miller’s house was
close by, and the miller, you must know, had a very beautiful daughter.
She was, moreover, very shrewd and clever; and the miller was so proud
of her, that he one day told the king of the land, who used to come and
hunt in the wood, that his daughter could spin gold out of straw. Now
this king was very fond of money; and when he heard the miller’s boast
his greediness was raised, and he sent for the girl to be brought before
him. Then he led her to a chamber in his palace where there was a great
heap of straw, and gave her a spinning-wheel, and said, ‘All this must
be spun into gold before morning, as you love your life.’ It was in vain
that the poor maiden said that it was only a silly boast of her father,
for that she could do no such thing as spin straw into gold: the chamber
door was locked, and she was left alone.

She sat down in one corner of the room, and began to bewail her hard
fate; when on a sudden the door opened, and a droll-looking little man
hobbled in, and said, ‘Good morrow to you, my good lass; what are you
weeping for?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘I must spin this straw into gold, and
I know not how.’ ‘What will you give me,’ said the hobgoblin, ‘to do it
for you?’ ‘My necklace,’ replied the maiden. He took her at her word,
and sat himself down to the wheel, and whistled and sang:

 ‘Round about, round about,
    Lo and behold!
  Reel away, reel away,
    Straw into gold!’

And round about the wheel went merrily; the work was quickly done, and
the straw was all spun into gold.

When the king came and saw this, he was greatly astonished and pleased;
but his heart grew still more greedy of gain, and he shut up the poor
miller’s daughter again with a fresh task. Then she knew not what to do,
and sat down once more to weep; but the dwarf soon opened the door, and
said, ‘What will you give me to do your task?’ ‘The ring on my finger,’
said she. So her little friend took the ring, and began to work at the
wheel again, and whistled and sang:

 ‘Round about, round about,
    Lo and behold!
  Reel away, reel away,
    Straw into gold!’

till, long before morning, all was done again.

The king was greatly delighted to see all this glittering treasure;
but still he had not enough: so he took the miller’s daughter to a yet
larger heap, and said, ‘All this must be spun tonight; and if it is,
you shall be my queen.’ As soon as she was alone that dwarf came in, and
said, ‘What will you give me to spin gold for you this third time?’
‘I have nothing left,’ said she. ‘Then say you will give me,’ said
the little man, ‘the first little child that you may have when you are
queen.’ ‘That may never be,’ thought the miller’s daughter: and as she
knew no other way to get her task done, she said she would do what he
asked. Round went the wheel again to the old song, and the manikin once
more spun the heap into gold. The king came in the morning, and, finding
all he wanted, was forced to keep his word; so he married the miller’s
daughter, and she really became queen.

At the birth of her first little child she was very glad, and forgot the
dwarf, and what she had said. But one day he came into her room, where
she was sitting playing with her baby, and put her in mind of it. Then
she grieved sorely at her misfortune, and said she would give him all
the wealth of the kingdom if he would let her off, but in vain; till at
last her tears softened him, and he said, ‘I will give you three days’
grace, and if during that time you tell me my name, you shall keep your
child.’

Now the queen lay awake all night, thinking of all the odd names that
she had ever heard; and she sent messengers all over the land to find
out new ones. The next day the little man came, and she began with
TIMOTHY, ICHABOD, BENJAMIN, JEREMIAH, and all the names she could
remember; but to all and each of them he said, ‘Madam, that is not my
name.’

The second day she began with all the comical names she could hear of,
BANDY-LEGS, HUNCHBACK, CROOK-SHANKS, and so on; but the little gentleman
still said to every one of them, ‘Madam, that is not my name.’

The third day one of the messengers came back, and said, ‘I have
travelled two days without hearing of any other names; but yesterday, as
I was climbing a high hill, among the trees of the forest where the fox
and the hare bid each other good night, I saw a little hut; and before
the hut burnt a fire; and round about the fire a funny little dwarf was
dancing upon one leg, and singing:

 “Merrily the feast I’ll make.
  Today I’ll brew, tomorrow bake;
  Merrily I’ll dance and sing,
  For next day will a stranger bring.
  Little does my lady dream
  Rumpelstiltskin is my name!”

When the queen heard this she jumped for joy, and as soon as her little
friend came she sat down upon her throne, and called all her court round
to enjoy the fun; and the nurse stood by her side with the baby in her
arms, as if it was quite ready to be given up. Then the little man began
to chuckle at the thought of having the poor child, to take home with
him to his hut in the woods; and he cried out, ‘Now, lady, what is my
name?’ ‘Is it JOHN?’ asked she. ‘No, madam!’ ‘Is it TOM?’ ‘No, madam!’
‘Is it JEMMY?’ ‘It is not.’ ‘Can your name be RUMPELSTILTSKIN?’ said the
lady slyly. ‘Some witch told you that!--some witch told you that!’ cried
the little man, and dashed his right foot in a rage so deep into the
floor, that he was forced to lay hold of it with both hands to pull it
out.

Then he made the best of his way off, while the nurse laughed and the
baby crowed; and all the court jeered at him for having had so much
trouble for nothing, and said, ‘We wish you a very good morning, and a
merry feast, Mr RUMPLESTILTSKIN!’




CLEVER GRETEL

There was once a cook named Gretel, who wore shoes with red heels, and
when she walked out with them on, she turned herself this way and that,
was quite happy and thought: ‘You certainly are a pretty girl!’ And when
she came home she drank, in her gladness of heart, a draught of wine,
and as wine excites a desire to eat, she tasted the best of whatever she
was cooking until she was satisfied, and said: ‘The cook must know what
the food is like.’

It came to pass that the master one day said to her: ‘Gretel, there is a
guest coming this evening; prepare me two fowls very daintily.’ ‘I will
see to it, master,’ answered Gretel. She killed two fowls, scalded them,
plucked them, put them on the spit, and towards evening set them before
the fire, that they might roast. The fowls began to turn brown, and were
nearly ready, but the guest had not yet arrived. Then Gretel called out
to her master: ‘If the guest does not come, I must take the fowls away
from the fire, but it will be a sin and a shame if they are not eaten
the moment they are at their juiciest.’ The master said: ‘I will run
myself, and fetch the guest.’ When the master had turned his back,
Gretel laid the spit with the fowls on one side, and thought: ‘Standing
so long by the fire there, makes one sweat and thirsty; who knows
when they will come? Meanwhile, I will run into the cellar, and take a
drink.’ She ran down, set a jug, said: ‘God bless it for you, Gretel,’
and took a good drink, and thought that wine should flow on, and should
not be interrupted, and took yet another hearty draught.

Then she went and put the fowls down again to the fire, basted them,
and drove the spit merrily round. But as the roast meat smelt so good,
Gretel thought: ‘Something might be wrong, it ought to be tasted!’
She touched it with her finger, and said: ‘Ah! how good fowls are! It
certainly is a sin and a shame that they are not eaten at the right
time!’ She ran to the window, to see if the master was not coming with
his guest, but she saw no one, and went back to the fowls and thought:
‘One of the wings is burning! I had better take it off and eat it.’
So she cut it off, ate it, and enjoyed it, and when she had done, she
thought: ‘The other must go down too, or else master will observe that
something is missing.’ When the two wings were eaten, she went and
looked for her master, and did not see him. It suddenly occurred to
her: ‘Who knows? They are perhaps not coming at all, and have turned in
somewhere.’ Then she said: ‘Well, Gretel, enjoy yourself, one fowl has
been cut into, take another drink, and eat it up entirely; when it is
eaten you will have some peace, why should God’s good gifts be spoilt?’
So she ran into the cellar again, took an enormous drink and ate up the
one chicken in great glee. When one of the chickens was swallowed down,
and still her master did not come, Gretel looked at the other and said:
‘What one is, the other should be likewise, the two go together; what’s
right for the one is right for the other; I think if I were to take
another draught it would do me no harm.’ So she took another hearty
drink, and let the second chicken follow the first.

While she was making the most of it, her master came and cried: ‘Hurry
up, Gretel, the guest is coming directly after me!’ ‘Yes, sir, I will
soon serve up,’ answered Gretel. Meantime the master looked to see that
the table was properly laid, and took the great knife, wherewith he was
going to carve the chickens, and sharpened it on the steps. Presently
the guest came, and knocked politely and courteously at the house-door.
Gretel ran, and looked to see who was there, and when she saw the guest,
she put her finger to her lips and said: ‘Hush! hush! go away as quickly
as you can, if my master catches you it will be the worse for you; he
certainly did ask you to supper, but his intention is to cut off your
two ears. Just listen how he is sharpening the knife for it!’ The guest
heard the sharpening, and hurried down the steps again as fast as he
could. Gretel was not idle; she ran screaming to her master, and cried:
‘You have invited a fine guest!’ ‘Why, Gretel? What do you mean by
that?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘he has taken the chickens which I was just
going to serve up, off the dish, and has run away with them!’ ‘That’s a
nice trick!’ said her master, and lamented the fine chickens. ‘If he had
but left me one, so that something remained for me to eat.’ He called to
him to stop, but the guest pretended not to hear. Then he ran after him
with the knife still in his hand, crying: ‘Just one, just one,’ meaning
that the guest should leave him just one chicken, and not take both. The
guest, however, thought no otherwise than that he was to give up one of
his ears, and ran as if fire were burning under him, in order to take
them both with him.




THE OLD MAN AND HIS GRANDSON

There was once a very old man, whose eyes had become dim, his ears dull
of hearing, his knees trembled, and when he sat at table he could hardly
hold the spoon, and spilt the broth upon the table-cloth or let it run
out of his mouth. His son and his son’s wife were disgusted at this, so
the old grandfather at last had to sit in the corner behind the stove,
and they gave him his food in an earthenware bowl, and not even enough
of it. And he used to look towards the table with his eyes full of
tears. Once, too, his trembling hands could not hold the bowl, and it
fell to the ground and broke. The young wife scolded him, but he said
nothing and only sighed. Then they brought him a wooden bowl for a few
half-pence, out of which he had to eat.

They were once sitting thus when the little grandson of four years old
began to gather together some bits of wood upon the ground. ‘What are
you doing there?’ asked the father. ‘I am making a little trough,’
answered the child, ‘for father and mother to eat out of when I am big.’

The man and his wife looked at each other for a while, and presently
began to cry. Then they took the old grandfather to the table, and
henceforth always let him eat with them, and likewise said nothing if he
did spill a little of anything.




THE LITTLE PEASANT

There was a certain village wherein no one lived but really rich
peasants, and just one poor one, whom they called the little peasant. He
had not even so much as a cow, and still less money to buy one, and
yet he and his wife did so wish to have one. One day he said to her:
‘Listen, I have a good idea, there is our gossip the carpenter, he shall
make us a wooden calf, and paint it brown, so that it looks like any
other, and in time it will certainly get big and be a cow.’ the woman
also liked the idea, and their gossip the carpenter cut and planed
the calf, and painted it as it ought to be, and made it with its head
hanging down as if it were eating.

Next morning when the cows were being driven out, the little peasant
called the cow-herd in and said: ‘Look, I have a little calf there,
but it is still small and has to be carried.’ The cow-herd said: ‘All
right,’ and took it in his arms and carried it to the pasture, and set
it among the grass. The little calf always remained standing like one
which was eating, and the cow-herd said: ‘It will soon run by itself,
just look how it eats already!’ At night when he was going to drive the
herd home again, he said to the calf: ‘If you can stand there and eat
your fill, you can also go on your four legs; I don’t care to drag you
home again in my arms.’ But the little peasant stood at his door, and
waited for his little calf, and when the cow-herd drove the cows through
the village, and the calf was missing, he inquired where it was. The
cow-herd answered: ‘It is still standing out there eating. It would not
stop and come with us.’ But the little peasant said: ‘Oh, but I must
have my beast back again.’ Then they went back to the meadow together,
but someone had stolen the calf, and it was gone. The cow-herd said: ‘It
must have run away.’ The peasant, however, said: ‘Don’t tell me
that,’ and led the cow-herd before the mayor, who for his carelessness
condemned him to give the peasant a cow for the calf which had run away.

And now the little peasant and his wife had the cow for which they had
so long wished, and they were heartily glad, but they had no food for
it, and could give it nothing to eat, so it soon had to be killed. They
salted the flesh, and the peasant went into the town and wanted to sell
the skin there, so that he might buy a new calf with the proceeds. On
the way he passed by a mill, and there sat a raven with broken wings,
and out of pity he took him and wrapped him in the skin. But as the
weather grew so bad and there was a storm of rain and wind, he could
go no farther, and turned back to the mill and begged for shelter. The
miller’s wife was alone in the house, and said to the peasant: ‘Lay
yourself on the straw there,’ and gave him a slice of bread and cheese.
The peasant ate it, and lay down with his skin beside him, and the woman
thought: ‘He is tired and has gone to sleep.’ In the meantime came the
parson; the miller’s wife received him well, and said: ‘My husband is
out, so we will have a feast.’ The peasant listened, and when he heard
them talk about feasting he was vexed that he had been forced to make
shift with a slice of bread and cheese. Then the woman served up four
different things, roast meat, salad, cakes, and wine.

Just as they were about to sit down and eat, there was a knocking
outside. The woman said: ‘Oh, heavens! It is my husband!’ she quickly
hid the roast meat inside the tiled stove, the wine under the pillow,
the salad on the bed, the cakes under it, and the parson in the closet
on the porch. Then she opened the door for her husband, and said: ‘Thank
heaven, you are back again! There is such a storm, it looks as if the
world were coming to an end.’ The miller saw the peasant lying on the
straw, and asked, ‘What is that fellow doing there?’ ‘Ah,’ said the
wife, ‘the poor knave came in the storm and rain, and begged for
shelter, so I gave him a bit of bread and cheese, and showed him where
the straw was.’ The man said: ‘I have no objection, but be quick and get
me something to eat.’ The woman said: ‘But I have nothing but bread and
cheese.’ ‘I am contented with anything,’ replied the husband, ‘so far as
I am concerned, bread and cheese will do,’ and looked at the peasant and
said: ‘Come and eat some more with me.’ The peasant did not require to
be invited twice, but got up and ate. After this the miller saw the skin
in which the raven was, lying on the ground, and asked: ‘What have you
there?’ The peasant answered: ‘I have a soothsayer inside it.’ ‘Can
he foretell anything to me?’ said the miller. ‘Why not?’ answered
the peasant: ‘but he only says four things, and the fifth he keeps to
himself.’ The miller was curious, and said: ‘Let him foretell something
for once.’ Then the peasant pinched the raven’s head, so that he croaked
and made a noise like krr, krr. The miller said: ‘What did he say?’ The
peasant answered: ‘In the first place, he says that there is some wine
hidden under the pillow.’ ‘Bless me!’ cried the miller, and went there
and found the wine. ‘Now go on,’ said he. The peasant made the raven
croak again, and said: ‘In the second place, he says that there is some
roast meat in the tiled stove.’ ‘Upon my word!’ cried the miller, and
went thither, and found the roast meat. The peasant made the raven
prophesy still more, and said: ‘Thirdly, he says that there is some
salad on the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the miller, and
went there and found the salad. At last the peasant pinched the raven
once more till he croaked, and said: ‘Fourthly, he says that there
are some cakes under the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the
miller, and looked there, and found the cakes.

And now the two sat down to the table together, but the miller’s wife
was frightened to death, and went to bed and took all the keys with
her. The miller would have liked much to know the fifth, but the little
peasant said: ‘First, we will quickly eat the four things, for the fifth
is something bad.’ So they ate, and after that they bargained how much
the miller was to give for the fifth prophecy, until they agreed on
three hundred talers. Then the peasant once more pinched the raven’s
head till he croaked loudly. The miller asked: ‘What did he say?’ The
peasant replied: ‘He says that the Devil is hiding outside there in
the closet on the porch.’ The miller said: ‘The Devil must go out,’ and
opened the house-door; then the woman was forced to give up the keys,
and the peasant unlocked the closet. The parson ran out as fast as he
could, and the miller said: ‘It was true; I saw the black rascal with my
own eyes.’ The peasant, however, made off next morning by daybreak with
the three hundred talers.

At home the small peasant gradually launched out; he built a beautiful
house, and the peasants said: ‘The small peasant has certainly been to
the place where golden snow falls, and people carry the gold home in
shovels.’ Then the small peasant was brought before the mayor, and
bidden to say from whence his wealth came. He answered: ‘I sold my cow’s
skin in the town, for three hundred talers.’ When the peasants heard
that, they too wished to enjoy this great profit, and ran home, killed
all their cows, and stripped off their skins in order to sell them in
the town to the greatest advantage. The mayor, however, said: ‘But my
servant must go first.’ When she came to the merchant in the town, he
did not give her more than two talers for a skin, and when the others
came, he did not give them so much, and said: ‘What can I do with all
these skins?’

Then the peasants were vexed that the small peasant should have thus
outwitted them, wanted to take vengeance on him, and accused him of this
treachery before the mayor. The innocent little peasant was unanimously
sentenced to death, and was to be rolled into the water, in a barrel
pierced full of holes. He was led forth, and a priest was brought who
was to say a mass for his soul. The others were all obliged to retire to
a distance, and when the peasant looked at the priest, he recognized the
man who had been with the miller’s wife. He said to him: ‘I set you free
from the closet, set me free from the barrel.’ At this same moment up
came, with a flock of sheep, the very shepherd whom the peasant knew had
long been wishing to be mayor, so he cried with all his might: ‘No, I
will not do it; if the whole world insists on it, I will not do it!’ The
shepherd hearing that, came up to him, and asked: ‘What are you about?
What is it that you will not do?’ The peasant said: ‘They want to make
me mayor, if I will but put myself in the barrel, but I will not do it.’
The shepherd said: ‘If nothing more than that is needful in order to be
mayor, I would get into the barrel at once.’ The peasant said: ‘If you
will get in, you will be mayor.’ The shepherd was willing, and got in,
and the peasant shut the top down on him; then he took the shepherd’s
flock for himself, and drove it away. The parson went to the crowd,
and declared that the mass had been said. Then they came and rolled the
barrel towards the water. When the barrel began to roll, the shepherd
cried: ‘I am quite willing to be mayor.’ They believed no otherwise than
that it was the peasant who was saying this, and answered: ‘That is
what we intend, but first you shall look about you a little down below
there,’ and they rolled the barrel down into the water.

After that the peasants went home, and as they were entering the
village, the small peasant also came quietly in, driving a flock of
sheep and looking quite contented. Then the peasants were astonished,
and said: ‘Peasant, from whence do you come? Have you come out of the
water?’ ‘Yes, truly,’ replied the peasant, ‘I sank deep, deep down,
until at last I got to the bottom; I pushed the bottom out of the
barrel, and crept out, and there were pretty meadows on which a number
of lambs were feeding, and from thence I brought this flock away with
me.’ Said the peasants: ‘Are there any more there?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ said he,
‘more than I could want.’ Then the peasants made up their minds that
they too would fetch some sheep for themselves, a flock apiece, but the
mayor said: ‘I come first.’ So they went to the water together, and just
then there were some of the small fleecy clouds in the blue sky, which
are called little lambs, and they were reflected in the water, whereupon
the peasants cried: ‘We already see the sheep down below!’ The mayor
pressed forward and said: ‘I will go down first, and look about me, and
if things promise well I’ll call you.’ So he jumped in; splash! went
the water; it sounded as if he were calling them, and the whole crowd
plunged in after him as one man. Then the entire village was dead, and
the small peasant, as sole heir, became a rich man.




FREDERICK AND CATHERINE

There was once a man called Frederick: he had a wife whose name was
Catherine, and they had not long been married. One day Frederick said.
‘Kate! I am going to work in the fields; when I come back I shall be
hungry so let me have something nice cooked, and a good draught of ale.’
‘Very well,’ said she, ‘it shall all be ready.’ When dinner-time drew
nigh, Catherine took a nice steak, which was all the meat she had, and
put it on the fire to fry. The steak soon began to look brown, and to
crackle in the pan; and Catherine stood by with a fork and turned it:
then she said to herself, ‘The steak is almost ready, I may as well go
to the cellar for the ale.’ So she left the pan on the fire and took a
large jug and went into the cellar and tapped the ale cask. The beer ran
into the jug and Catherine stood looking on. At last it popped into her
head, ‘The dog is not shut up--he may be running away with the steak;
that’s well thought of.’ So up she ran from the cellar; and sure enough
the rascally cur had got the steak in his mouth, and was making off with
it.

Away ran Catherine, and away ran the dog across the field: but he ran
faster than she, and stuck close to the steak. ‘It’s all gone, and “what
can’t be cured must be endured”,’ said Catherine. So she turned round;
and as she had run a good way and was tired, she walked home leisurely
to cool herself.

Now all this time the ale was running too, for Catherine had not turned
the cock; and when the jug was full the liquor ran upon the floor till
the cask was empty. When she got to the cellar stairs she saw what had
happened. ‘My stars!’ said she, ‘what shall I do to keep Frederick from
seeing all this slopping about?’ So she thought a while; and at last
remembered that there was a sack of fine meal bought at the last fair,
and that if she sprinkled this over the floor it would suck up the ale
nicely. ‘What a lucky thing,’ said she, ‘that we kept that meal! we have
now a good use for it.’ So away she went for it: but she managed to set
it down just upon the great jug full of beer, and upset it; and thus
all the ale that had been saved was set swimming on the floor also. ‘Ah!
well,’ said she, ‘when one goes another may as well follow.’ Then she
strewed the meal all about the cellar, and was quite pleased with her
cleverness, and said, ‘How very neat and clean it looks!’

At noon Frederick came home. ‘Now, wife,’ cried he, ‘what have you for
dinner?’ ‘O Frederick!’ answered she, ‘I was cooking you a steak; but
while I went down to draw the ale, the dog ran away with it; and while
I ran after him, the ale ran out; and when I went to dry up the ale
with the sack of meal that we got at the fair, I upset the jug: but the
cellar is now quite dry, and looks so clean!’ ‘Kate, Kate,’ said he,
‘how could you do all this?’ Why did you leave the steak to fry, and the
ale to run, and then spoil all the meal?’ ‘Why, Frederick,’ said she, ‘I
did not know I was doing wrong; you should have told me before.’

The husband thought to himself, ‘If my wife manages matters thus, I must
look sharp myself.’ Now he had a good deal of gold in the house: so he
said to Catherine, ‘What pretty yellow buttons these are! I shall put
them into a box and bury them in the garden; but take care that you
never go near or meddle with them.’ ‘No, Frederick,’ said she, ‘that
I never will.’ As soon as he was gone, there came by some pedlars with
earthenware plates and dishes, and they asked her whether she would buy.
‘Oh dear me, I should like to buy very much, but I have no money: if
you had any use for yellow buttons, I might deal with you.’ ‘Yellow
buttons!’ said they: ‘let us have a look at them.’ ‘Go into the garden
and dig where I tell you, and you will find the yellow buttons: I dare
not go myself.’ So the rogues went: and when they found what these
yellow buttons were, they took them all away, and left her plenty of
plates and dishes. Then she set them all about the house for a show:
and when Frederick came back, he cried out, ‘Kate, what have you been
doing?’ ‘See,’ said she, ‘I have bought all these with your yellow
buttons: but I did not touch them myself; the pedlars went themselves
and dug them up.’ ‘Wife, wife,’ said Frederick, ‘what a pretty piece of
work you have made! those yellow buttons were all my money: how came you
to do such a thing?’ ‘Why,’ answered she, ‘I did not know there was any
harm in it; you should have told me.’

Catherine stood musing for a while, and at last said to her husband,
‘Hark ye, Frederick, we will soon get the gold back: let us run after
the thieves.’ ‘Well, we will try,’ answered he; ‘but take some butter
and cheese with you, that we may have something to eat by the way.’
‘Very well,’ said she; and they set out: and as Frederick walked the
fastest, he left his wife some way behind. ‘It does not matter,’ thought
she: ‘when we turn back, I shall be so much nearer home than he.’

Presently she came to the top of a hill, down the side of which there
was a road so narrow that the cart wheels always chafed the trees
on each side as they passed. ‘Ah, see now,’ said she, ‘how they have
bruised and wounded those poor trees; they will never get well.’ So she
took pity on them, and made use of the butter to grease them all, so
that the wheels might not hurt them so much. While she was doing this
kind office one of her cheeses fell out of the basket, and rolled down
the hill. Catherine looked, but could not see where it had gone; so she
said, ‘Well, I suppose the other will go the same way and find you; he
has younger legs than I have.’ Then she rolled the other cheese after
it; and away it went, nobody knows where, down the hill. But she said
she supposed that they knew the road, and would follow her, and she
could not stay there all day waiting for them.

At last she overtook Frederick, who desired her to give him something to
eat. Then she gave him the dry bread. ‘Where are the butter and cheese?’
said he. ‘Oh!’ answered she, ‘I used the butter to grease those poor
trees that the wheels chafed so: and one of the cheeses ran away so I
sent the other after it to find it, and I suppose they are both on
the road together somewhere.’ ‘What a goose you are to do such silly
things!’ said the husband. ‘How can you say so?’ said she; ‘I am sure
you never told me not.’

They ate the dry bread together; and Frederick said, ‘Kate, I hope you
locked the door safe when you came away.’ ‘No,’ answered she, ‘you did
not tell me.’ ‘Then go home, and do it now before we go any farther,’
said Frederick, ‘and bring with you something to eat.’

Catherine did as he told her, and thought to herself by the way,
‘Frederick wants something to eat; but I don’t think he is very fond of
butter and cheese: I’ll bring him a bag of fine nuts, and the vinegar,
for I have often seen him take some.’

When she reached home, she bolted the back door, but the front door she
took off the hinges, and said, ‘Frederick told me to lock the door, but
surely it can nowhere be so safe if I take it with me.’ So she took
her time by the way; and when she overtook her husband she cried
out, ‘There, Frederick, there is the door itself, you may watch it as
carefully as you please.’ ‘Alas! alas!’ said he, ‘what a clever wife I
have! I sent you to make the house fast, and you take the door away, so
that everybody may go in and out as they please--however, as you have
brought the door, you shall carry it about with you for your pains.’
‘Very well,’ answered she, ‘I’ll carry the door; but I’ll not carry the
nuts and vinegar bottle also--that would be too much of a load; so if
you please, I’ll fasten them to the door.’

Frederick of course made no objection to that plan, and they set off
into the wood to look for the thieves; but they could not find them: and
when it grew dark, they climbed up into a tree to spend the night there.
Scarcely were they up, than who should come by but the very rogues they
were looking for. They were in truth great rascals, and belonged to that
class of people who find things before they are lost; they were tired;
so they sat down and made a fire under the very tree where Frederick and
Catherine were. Frederick slipped down on the other side, and picked up
some stones. Then he climbed up again, and tried to hit the thieves on
the head with them: but they only said, ‘It must be near morning, for
the wind shakes the fir-apples down.’

Catherine, who had the door on her shoulder, began to be very tired;
but she thought it was the nuts upon it that were so heavy: so she said
softly, ‘Frederick, I must let the nuts go.’ ‘No,’ answered he, ‘not
now, they will discover us.’ ‘I can’t help that: they must go.’ ‘Well,
then, make haste and throw them down, if you will.’ Then away rattled
the nuts down among the boughs and one of the thieves cried, ‘Bless me,
it is hailing.’

A little while after, Catherine thought the door was still very heavy:
so she whispered to Frederick, ‘I must throw the vinegar down.’ ‘Pray
don’t,’ answered he, ‘it will discover us.’ ‘I can’t help that,’ said
she, ‘go it must.’ So she poured all the vinegar down; and the thieves
said, ‘What a heavy dew there is!’

At last it popped into Catherine’s head that it was the door itself that
was so heavy all the time: so she whispered, ‘Frederick, I must throw
the door down soon.’ But he begged and prayed her not to do so, for he
was sure it would betray them. ‘Here goes, however,’ said she: and down
went the door with such a clatter upon the thieves, that they cried
out ‘Murder!’ and not knowing what was coming, ran away as fast as they
could, and left all the gold. So when Frederick and Catherine came down,
there they found all their money safe and sound.




SWEETHEART ROLAND

There was once upon a time a woman who was a real witch and had two
daughters, one ugly and wicked, and this one she loved because she was
her own daughter, and one beautiful and good, and this one she hated,
because she was her stepdaughter. The stepdaughter once had a pretty
apron, which the other fancied so much that she became envious, and
told her mother that she must and would have that apron. ‘Be quiet, my
child,’ said the old woman, ‘and you shall have it. Your stepsister has
long deserved death; tonight when she is asleep I will come and cut her
head off. Only be careful that you are at the far side of the bed, and
push her well to the front.’ It would have been all over with the poor
girl if she had not just then been standing in a corner, and heard
everything. All day long she dared not go out of doors, and when bedtime
had come, the witch’s daughter got into bed first, so as to lie at the
far side, but when she was asleep, the other pushed her gently to the
front, and took for herself the place at the back, close by the wall. In
the night, the old woman came creeping in, she held an axe in her right
hand, and felt with her left to see if anyone were lying at the outside,
and then she grasped the axe with both hands, and cut her own child’s
head off.

When she had gone away, the girl got up and went to her sweetheart, who
was called Roland, and knocked at his door. When he came out, she said
to him: ‘Listen, dearest Roland, we must fly in all haste; my stepmother
wanted to kill me, but has struck her own child. When daylight comes,
and she sees what she has done, we shall be lost.’ ‘But,’ said Roland,
‘I counsel you first to take away her magic wand, or we cannot escape
if she pursues us.’ The maiden fetched the magic wand, and she took the
dead girl’s head and dropped three drops of blood on the ground, one in
front of the bed, one in the kitchen, and one on the stairs. Then she
hurried away with her lover.

When the old witch got up next morning, she called her daughter, and
wanted to give her the apron, but she did not come. Then the witch
cried: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Here, on the stairs, I am sweeping,’ answered
the first drop of blood. The old woman went out, but saw no one on the
stairs, and cried again: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Here in the kitchen, I am
warming myself,’ cried the second drop of blood. She went into the
kitchen, but found no one. Then she cried again: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Ah,
here in the bed, I am sleeping,’ cried the third drop of blood. She went
into the room to the bed. What did she see there? Her own child,
whose head she had cut off, bathed in her blood. The witch fell into
a passion, sprang to the window, and as she could look forth quite far
into the world, she perceived her stepdaughter hurrying away with her
sweetheart Roland. ‘That shall not help you,’ cried she, ‘even if you
have got a long way off, you shall still not escape me.’ She put on her
many-league boots, in which she covered an hour’s walk at every step,
and it was not long before she overtook them. The girl, however, when
she saw the old woman striding towards her, changed, with her magic
wand, her sweetheart Roland into a lake, and herself into a duck
swimming in the middle of it. The witch placed herself on the shore,
threw breadcrumbs in, and went to endless trouble to entice the duck;
but the duck did not let herself be enticed, and the old woman had to
go home at night as she had come. At this the girl and her sweetheart
Roland resumed their natural shapes again, and they walked on the whole
night until daybreak. Then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful
flower which stood in the midst of a briar hedge, and her sweetheart
Roland into a fiddler. It was not long before the witch came striding up
towards them, and said to the musician: ‘Dear musician, may I pluck that
beautiful flower for myself?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘I will play to
you while you do it.’ As she was hastily creeping into the hedge and was
just going to pluck the flower, knowing perfectly well who the flower
was, he began to play, and whether she would or not, she was forced
to dance, for it was a magical dance. The faster he played, the more
violent springs was she forced to make, and the thorns tore her clothes
from her body, and pricked her and wounded her till she bled, and as he
did not stop, she had to dance till she lay dead on the ground.

As they were now set free, Roland said: ‘Now I will go to my father and
arrange for the wedding.’ ‘Then in the meantime I will stay here and
wait for you,’ said the girl, ‘and that no one may recognize me, I will
change myself into a red stone landmark.’ Then Roland went away, and the
girl stood like a red landmark in the field and waited for her beloved.
But when Roland got home, he fell into the snares of another, who so
fascinated him that he forgot the maiden. The poor girl remained there a
long time, but at length, as he did not return at all, she was sad, and
changed herself into a flower, and thought: ‘Someone will surely come
this way, and trample me down.’

It befell, however, that a shepherd kept his sheep in the field and saw
the flower, and as it was so pretty, plucked it, took it with him, and
laid it away in his chest. From that time forth, strange things happened
in the shepherd’s house. When he arose in the morning, all the work was
already done, the room was swept, the table and benches cleaned, the
fire in the hearth was lighted, and the water was fetched, and at noon,
when he came home, the table was laid, and a good dinner served. He
could not conceive how this came to pass, for he never saw a human being
in his house, and no one could have concealed himself in it. He was
certainly pleased with this good attendance, but still at last he was so
afraid that he went to a wise woman and asked for her advice. The wise
woman said: ‘There is some enchantment behind it, listen very early some
morning if anything is moving in the room, and if you see anything, no
matter what it is, throw a white cloth over it, and then the magic will
be stopped.’

The shepherd did as she bade him, and next morning just as day dawned,
he saw the chest open, and the flower come out. Swiftly he
sprang towards it, and threw a white cloth over it. Instantly the
transformation came to an end, and a beautiful girl stood before him,
who admitted to him that she had been the flower, and that up to this
time she had attended to his house-keeping. She told him her story,
and as she pleased him he asked her if she would marry him, but she
answered: ‘No,’ for she wanted to remain faithful to her sweetheart
Roland, although he had deserted her. Nevertheless, she promised not to
go away, but to continue keeping house for the shepherd.

And now the time drew near when Roland’s wedding was to be celebrated,
and then, according to an old custom in the country, it was announced
that all the girls were to be present at it, and sing in honour of the
bridal pair. When the faithful maiden heard of this, she grew so sad
that she thought her heart would break, and she would not go thither,
but the other girls came and took her. When it came to her turn to sing,
she stepped back, until at last she was the only one left, and then she
could not refuse. But when she began her song, and it reached Roland’s
ears, he sprang up and cried: ‘I know the voice, that is the true
bride, I will have no other!’ Everything he had forgotten, and which had
vanished from his mind, had suddenly come home again to his heart. Then
the faithful maiden held her wedding with her sweetheart Roland, and
grief came to an end and joy began.




SNOWDROP

It was the middle of winter, when the broad flakes of snow were falling
around, that the queen of a country many thousand miles off sat working
at her window. The frame of the window was made of fine black ebony, and
as she sat looking out upon the snow, she pricked her finger, and three
drops of blood fell upon it. Then she gazed thoughtfully upon the red
drops that sprinkled the white snow, and said, ‘Would that my little
daughter may be as white as that snow, as red as that blood, and as
black as this ebony windowframe!’ And so the little girl really did grow
up; her skin was as white as snow, her cheeks as rosy as the blood, and
her hair as black as ebony; and she was called Snowdrop.

But this queen died; and the king soon married another wife, who became
queen, and was very beautiful, but so vain that she could not bear
to think that anyone could be handsomer than she was. She had a fairy
looking-glass, to which she used to go, and then she would gaze upon
herself in it, and say:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass had always answered:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all the land.’

But Snowdrop grew more and more beautiful; and when she was seven years
old she was as bright as the day, and fairer than the queen herself.
Then the glass one day answered the queen, when she went to look in it
as usual:

 ‘Thou, queen, art fair, and beauteous to see,
  But Snowdrop is lovelier far than thee!’

When she heard this she turned pale with rage and envy, and called to
one of her servants, and said, ‘Take Snowdrop away into the wide wood,
that I may never see her any more.’ Then the servant led her away; but
his heart melted when Snowdrop begged him to spare her life, and he
said, ‘I will not hurt you, thou pretty child.’ So he left her by
herself; and though he thought it most likely that the wild beasts would
tear her in pieces, he felt as if a great weight were taken off his
heart when he had made up his mind not to kill her but to leave her to
her fate, with the chance of someone finding and saving her.

Then poor Snowdrop wandered along through the wood in great fear; and
the wild beasts roared about her, but none did her any harm. In the
evening she came to a cottage among the hills, and went in to rest, for
her little feet would carry her no further. Everything was spruce and
neat in the cottage: on the table was spread a white cloth, and there
were seven little plates, seven little loaves, and seven little glasses
with wine in them; and seven knives and forks laid in order; and by
the wall stood seven little beds. As she was very hungry, she picked
a little piece of each loaf and drank a very little wine out of each
glass; and after that she thought she would lie down and rest. So she
tried all the little beds; but one was too long, and another was too
short, till at last the seventh suited her: and there she laid herself
down and went to sleep.

By and by in came the masters of the cottage. Now they were seven little
dwarfs, that lived among the mountains, and dug and searched for gold.
They lighted up their seven lamps, and saw at once that all was not
right. The first said, ‘Who has been sitting on my stool?’ The second,
‘Who has been eating off my plate?’ The third, ‘Who has been picking my
bread?’ The fourth, ‘Who has been meddling with my spoon?’ The fifth,
‘Who has been handling my fork?’ The sixth, ‘Who has been cutting with
my knife?’ The seventh, ‘Who has been drinking my wine?’ Then the first
looked round and said, ‘Who has been lying on my bed?’ And the rest came
running to him, and everyone cried out that somebody had been upon his
bed. But the seventh saw Snowdrop, and called all his brethren to come
and see her; and they cried out with wonder and astonishment and brought
their lamps to look at her, and said, ‘Good heavens! what a lovely child
she is!’ And they were very glad to see her, and took care not to wake
her; and the seventh dwarf slept an hour with each of the other dwarfs
in turn, till the night was gone.

In the morning Snowdrop told them all her story; and they pitied her,
and said if she would keep all things in order, and cook and wash and
knit and spin for them, she might stay where she was, and they would
take good care of her. Then they went out all day long to their work,
seeking for gold and silver in the mountains: but Snowdrop was left at
home; and they warned her, and said, ‘The queen will soon find out where
you are, so take care and let no one in.’

But the queen, now that she thought Snowdrop was dead, believed that she
must be the handsomest lady in the land; and she went to her glass and
said:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass answered:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all this land:
  But over the hills, in the greenwood shade,
  Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made,
  There Snowdrop is hiding her head; and she
  Is lovelier far, O queen! than thee.’

Then the queen was very much frightened; for she knew that the glass
always spoke the truth, and was sure that the servant had betrayed her.
And she could not bear to think that anyone lived who was more beautiful
than she was; so she dressed herself up as an old pedlar, and went
her way over the hills, to the place where the dwarfs dwelt. Then she
knocked at the door, and cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ Snowdrop looked
out at the window, and said, ‘Good day, good woman! what have you to
sell?’ ‘Good wares, fine wares,’ said she; ‘laces and bobbins of all
colours.’ ‘I will let the old lady in; she seems to be a very good
sort of body,’ thought Snowdrop, as she ran down and unbolted the door.
‘Bless me!’ said the old woman, ‘how badly your stays are laced! Let me
lace them up with one of my nice new laces.’ Snowdrop did not dream of
any mischief; so she stood before the old woman; but she set to work
so nimbly, and pulled the lace so tight, that Snowdrop’s breath was
stopped, and she fell down as if she were dead. ‘There’s an end to all
thy beauty,’ said the spiteful queen, and went away home.

In the evening the seven dwarfs came home; and I need not say how
grieved they were to see their faithful Snowdrop stretched out upon the
ground, as if she was quite dead. However, they lifted her up, and when
they found what ailed her, they cut the lace; and in a little time she
began to breathe, and very soon came to life again. Then they said, ‘The
old woman was the queen herself; take care another time, and let no one
in when we are away.’

When the queen got home, she went straight to her glass, and spoke to it
as before; but to her great grief it still said:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all this land:
  But over the hills, in the greenwood shade,
  Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made,
  There Snowdrop is hiding her head; and she
  Is lovelier far, O queen! than thee.’

Then the blood ran cold in her heart with spite and malice, to see that
Snowdrop still lived; and she dressed herself up again, but in quite
another dress from the one she wore before, and took with her a poisoned
comb. When she reached the dwarfs’ cottage, she knocked at the door, and
cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ But Snowdrop said, ‘I dare not let anyone
in.’ Then the queen said, ‘Only look at my beautiful combs!’ and gave
her the poisoned one. And it looked so pretty, that she took it up and
put it into her hair to try it; but the moment it touched her head,
the poison was so powerful that she fell down senseless. ‘There you may
lie,’ said the queen, and went her way. But by good luck the dwarfs
came in very early that evening; and when they saw Snowdrop lying on
the ground, they thought what had happened, and soon found the poisoned
comb. And when they took it away she got well, and told them all that
had passed; and they warned her once more not to open the door to
anyone.

Meantime the queen went home to her glass, and shook with rage when she
read the very same answer as before; and she said, ‘Snowdrop shall die,
if it cost me my life.’ So she went by herself into her chamber, and got
ready a poisoned apple: the outside looked very rosy and tempting, but
whoever tasted it was sure to die. Then she dressed herself up as a
peasant’s wife, and travelled over the hills to the dwarfs’ cottage,
and knocked at the door; but Snowdrop put her head out of the window and
said, ‘I dare not let anyone in, for the dwarfs have told me not.’ ‘Do
as you please,’ said the old woman, ‘but at any rate take this pretty
apple; I will give it you.’ ‘No,’ said Snowdrop, ‘I dare not take it.’
‘You silly girl!’ answered the other, ‘what are you afraid of? Do you
think it is poisoned? Come! do you eat one part, and I will eat the
other.’ Now the apple was so made up that one side was good, though the
other side was poisoned. Then Snowdrop was much tempted to taste, for
the apple looked so very nice; and when she saw the old woman eat, she
could wait no longer. But she had scarcely put the piece into her mouth,
when she fell down dead upon the ground. ‘This time nothing will save
thee,’ said the queen; and she went home to her glass, and at last it
said:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest of all the fair.’

And then her wicked heart was glad, and as happy as such a heart could
be.

When evening came, and the dwarfs had gone home, they found Snowdrop
lying on the ground: no breath came from her lips, and they were afraid
that she was quite dead. They lifted her up, and combed her hair, and
washed her face with wine and water; but all was in vain, for the little
girl seemed quite dead. So they laid her down upon a bier, and all seven
watched and bewailed her three whole days; and then they thought they
would bury her: but her cheeks were still rosy; and her face looked just
as it did while she was alive; so they said, ‘We will never bury her in
the cold ground.’ And they made a coffin of glass, so that they might
still look at her, and wrote upon it in golden letters what her name
was, and that she was a king’s daughter. And the coffin was set among
the hills, and one of the dwarfs always sat by it and watched. And the
birds of the air came too, and bemoaned Snowdrop; and first of all came
an owl, and then a raven, and at last a dove, and sat by her side.

And thus Snowdrop lay for a long, long time, and still only looked as
though she was asleep; for she was even now as white as snow, and as red
as blood, and as black as ebony. At last a prince came and called at the
dwarfs’ house; and he saw Snowdrop, and read what was written in golden
letters. Then he offered the dwarfs money, and prayed and besought them
to let him take her away; but they said, ‘We will not part with her for
all the gold in the world.’ At last, however, they had pity on him, and
gave him the coffin; but the moment he lifted it up to carry it home
with him, the piece of apple fell from between her lips, and Snowdrop
awoke, and said, ‘Where am I?’ And the prince said, ‘Thou art quite safe
with me.’

Then he told her all that had happened, and said, ‘I love you far better
than all the world; so come with me to my father’s palace, and you shall
be my wife.’ And Snowdrop consented, and went home with the prince;
and everything was got ready with great pomp and splendour for their
wedding.

To the feast was asked, among the rest, Snowdrop’s old enemy the queen;
and as she was dressing herself in fine rich clothes, she looked in the
glass and said:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass answered:

 ‘Thou, lady, art loveliest here, I ween;
  But lovelier far is the new-made queen.’

When she heard this she started with rage; but her envy and curiosity
were so great, that she could not help setting out to see the bride. And
when she got there, and saw that it was no other than Snowdrop, who, as
she thought, had been dead a long while, she choked with rage, and fell
down and died: but Snowdrop and the prince lived and reigned happily
over that land many, many years; and sometimes they went up into the
mountains, and paid a visit to the little dwarfs, who had been so kind
to Snowdrop in her time of need.




THE PINK

There was once upon a time a queen to whom God had given no children.
Every morning she went into the garden and prayed to God in heaven to
bestow on her a son or a daughter. Then an angel from heaven came to her
and said: ‘Be at rest, you shall have a son with the power of wishing,
so that whatsoever in the world he wishes for, that shall he have.’ Then
she went to the king, and told him the joyful tidings, and when the time
was come she gave birth to a son, and the king was filled with gladness.

Every morning she went with the child to the garden where the wild
beasts were kept, and washed herself there in a clear stream. It
happened once when the child was a little older, that it was lying in
her arms and she fell asleep. Then came the old cook, who knew that the
child had the power of wishing, and stole it away, and he took a hen,
and cut it in pieces, and dropped some of its blood on the queen’s apron
and on her dress. Then he carried the child away to a secret place,
where a nurse was obliged to suckle it, and he ran to the king and
accused the queen of having allowed her child to be taken from her by
the wild beasts. When the king saw the blood on her apron, he believed
this, fell into such a passion that he ordered a high tower to be built,
in which neither sun nor moon could be seen and had his wife put into
it, and walled up. Here she was to stay for seven years without meat
or drink, and die of hunger. But God sent two angels from heaven in the
shape of white doves, which flew to her twice a day, and carried her
food until the seven years were over.

The cook, however, thought to himself: ‘If the child has the power of
wishing, and I am here, he might very easily get me into trouble.’ So
he left the palace and went to the boy, who was already big enough to
speak, and said to him: ‘Wish for a beautiful palace for yourself with
a garden, and all else that pertains to it.’ Scarcely were the words out
of the boy’s mouth, when everything was there that he had wished for.
After a while the cook said to him: ‘It is not well for you to be so
alone, wish for a pretty girl as a companion.’ Then the king’s son
wished for one, and she immediately stood before him, and was more
beautiful than any painter could have painted her. The two played
together, and loved each other with all their hearts, and the old cook
went out hunting like a nobleman. The thought occurred to him, however,
that the king’s son might some day wish to be with his father, and thus
bring him into great peril. So he went out and took the maiden aside,
and said: ‘Tonight when the boy is asleep, go to his bed and plunge this
knife into his heart, and bring me his heart and tongue, and if you do
not do it, you shall lose your life.’ Thereupon he went away, and when
he returned next day she had not done it, and said: ‘Why should I shed
the blood of an innocent boy who has never harmed anyone?’ The cook once
more said: ‘If you do not do it, it shall cost you your own life.’ When
he had gone away, she had a little hind brought to her, and ordered her
to be killed, and took her heart and tongue, and laid them on a plate,
and when she saw the old man coming, she said to the boy: ‘Lie down in
your bed, and draw the clothes over you.’ Then the wicked wretch came in
and said: ‘Where are the boy’s heart and tongue?’ The girl reached the
plate to him, but the king’s son threw off the quilt, and said: ‘You old
sinner, why did you want to kill me? Now will I pronounce thy sentence.
You shall become a black poodle and have a gold collar round your neck,
and shall eat burning coals, till the flames burst forth from your
throat.’ And when he had spoken these words, the old man was changed
into a poodle dog, and had a gold collar round his neck, and the cooks
were ordered to bring up some live coals, and these he ate, until the
flames broke forth from his throat. The king’s son remained there a
short while longer, and he thought of his mother, and wondered if she
were still alive. At length he said to the maiden: ‘I will go home to my
own country; if you will go with me, I will provide for you.’ ‘Ah,’
she replied, ‘the way is so long, and what shall I do in a strange land
where I am unknown?’ As she did not seem quite willing, and as they
could not be parted from each other, he wished that she might be changed
into a beautiful pink, and took her with him. Then he went away to his
own country, and the poodle had to run after him. He went to the tower
in which his mother was confined, and as it was so high, he wished for
a ladder which would reach up to the very top. Then he mounted up and
looked inside, and cried: ‘Beloved mother, Lady Queen, are you still
alive, or are you dead?’ She answered: ‘I have just eaten, and am still
satisfied,’ for she thought the angels were there. Said he: ‘I am your
dear son, whom the wild beasts were said to have torn from your arms;
but I am alive still, and will soon set you free.’ Then he descended
again, and went to his father, and caused himself to be announced as a
strange huntsman, and asked if he could offer him service. The king said
yes, if he was skilful and could get game for him, he should come to
him, but that deer had never taken up their quarters in any part of the
district or country. Then the huntsman promised to procure as much game
for him as he could possibly use at the royal table. So he summoned all
the huntsmen together, and bade them go out into the forest with him.
And he went with them and made them form a great circle, open at one end
where he stationed himself, and began to wish. Two hundred deer and more
came running inside the circle at once, and the huntsmen shot them.
Then they were all placed on sixty country carts, and driven home to the
king, and for once he was able to deck his table with game, after having
had none at all for years.

Now the king felt great joy at this, and commanded that his entire
household should eat with him next day, and made a great feast. When
they were all assembled together, he said to the huntsman: ‘As you are
so clever, you shall sit by me.’ He replied: ‘Lord King, your majesty
must excuse me, I am a poor huntsman.’ But the king insisted on it,
and said: ‘You shall sit by me,’ until he did it. Whilst he was sitting
there, he thought of his dearest mother, and wished that one of the
king’s principal servants would begin to speak of her, and would ask how
it was faring with the queen in the tower, and if she were alive still,
or had perished. Hardly had he formed the wish than the marshal began,
and said: ‘Your majesty, we live joyously here, but how is the queen
living in the tower? Is she still alive, or has she died?’ But the king
replied: ‘She let my dear son be torn to pieces by wild beasts; I will
not have her named.’ Then the huntsman arose and said: ‘Gracious lord
father she is alive still, and I am her son, and I was not carried away
by wild beasts, but by that wretch the old cook, who tore me from her
arms when she was asleep, and sprinkled her apron with the blood of a
chicken.’ Thereupon he took the dog with the golden collar, and said:
‘That is the wretch!’ and caused live coals to be brought, and these the
dog was compelled to devour before the sight of all, until flames burst
forth from its throat. On this the huntsman asked the king if he would
like to see the dog in his true shape, and wished him back into the form
of the cook, in which he stood immediately, with his white apron,
and his knife by his side. When the king saw him he fell into a passion,
and ordered him to be cast into the deepest dungeon. Then the huntsman
spoke further and said: ‘Father, will you see the maiden who brought me
up so tenderly and who was afterwards to murder me, but did not do it,
though her own life depended on it?’ The king replied: ‘Yes, I would
like to see her.’ The son said: ‘Most gracious father, I will show her
to you in the form of a beautiful flower,’ and he thrust his hand into
his pocket and brought forth the pink, and placed it on the royal table,
and it was so beautiful that the king had never seen one to equal it.
Then the son said: ‘Now will I show her to you in her own form,’ and
wished that she might become a maiden, and she stood there looking so
beautiful that no painter could have made her look more so.

And the king sent two waiting-maids and two attendants into the tower,
to fetch the queen and bring her to the royal table. But when she was
led in she ate nothing, and said: ‘The gracious and merciful God who has
supported me in the tower, will soon set me free.’ She lived three days
more, and then died happily, and when she was buried, the two white
doves which had brought her food to the tower, and were angels of
heaven, followed her body and seated themselves on her grave. The aged
king ordered the cook to be torn in four pieces, but grief consumed the
king’s own heart, and he soon died. His son married the beautiful maiden
whom he had brought with him as a flower in his pocket, and whether they
are still alive or not, is known to God.




CLEVER ELSIE

There was once a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Elsie. And
when she had grown up her father said: ‘We will get her married.’ ‘Yes,’
said the mother, ‘if only someone would come who would have her.’ At
length a man came from a distance and wooed her, who was called Hans;
but he stipulated that Clever Elsie should be really smart. ‘Oh,’ said
the father, ‘she has plenty of good sense’; and the mother said: ‘Oh,
she can see the wind coming up the street, and hear the flies coughing.’
‘Well,’ said Hans, ‘if she is not really smart, I won’t have her.’ When
they were sitting at dinner and had eaten, the mother said: ‘Elsie, go
into the cellar and fetch some beer.’ Then Clever Elsie took the pitcher
from the wall, went into the cellar, and tapped the lid briskly as she
went, so that the time might not appear long. When she was below she
fetched herself a chair, and set it before the barrel so that she had
no need to stoop, and did not hurt her back or do herself any unexpected
injury. Then she placed the can before her, and turned the tap, and
while the beer was running she would not let her eyes be idle, but
looked up at the wall, and after much peering here and there, saw a
pick-axe exactly above her, which the masons had accidentally left
there.

Then Clever Elsie began to weep and said: ‘If I get Hans, and we have
a child, and he grows big, and we send him into the cellar here to draw
beer, then the pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then she
sat and wept and screamed with all the strength of her body, over the
misfortune which lay before her. Those upstairs waited for the drink,
but Clever Elsie still did not come. Then the woman said to the servant:
‘Just go down into the cellar and see where Elsie is.’ The maid went and
found her sitting in front of the barrel, screaming loudly. ‘Elsie why
do you weep?’ asked the maid. ‘Ah,’ she answered, ‘have I not reason to
weep? If I get Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to
draw beer here, the pick-axe will perhaps fall on his head, and kill
him.’ Then said the maid: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down
beside her and began loudly to weep over the misfortune. After a while,
as the maid did not come back, and those upstairs were thirsty for the
beer, the man said to the boy: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see
where Elsie and the girl are.’ The boy went down, and there sat Clever
Elsie and the girl both weeping together. Then he asked: ‘Why are you
weeping?’ ‘Ah,’ said Elsie, ‘have I not reason to weep? If I get Hans,
and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the
pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then said the boy: ‘What
a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down by her, and likewise began to
howl loudly. Upstairs they waited for the boy, but as he still did not
return, the man said to the woman: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see
where Elsie is!’ The woman went down, and found all three in the midst
of their lamentations, and inquired what was the cause; then Elsie told
her also that her future child was to be killed by the pick-axe, when it
grew big and had to draw beer, and the pick-axe fell down. Then said the
mother likewise: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down and wept
with them. The man upstairs waited a short time, but as his wife did not
come back and his thirst grew ever greater, he said: ‘I must go into the
cellar myself and see where Elsie is.’ But when he got into the cellar,
and they were all sitting together crying, and he heard the reason, and
that Elsie’s child was the cause, and the Elsie might perhaps bring one
into the world some day, and that he might be killed by the pick-axe, if
he should happen to be sitting beneath it, drawing beer just at the very
time when it fell down, he cried: ‘Oh, what a clever Elsie!’ and sat
down, and likewise wept with them. The bridegroom stayed upstairs alone
for a long time; then as no one would come back he thought: ‘They must be
waiting for me below: I too must go there and see what they are about.’
When he got down, the five of them were sitting screaming and lamenting
quite piteously, each out-doing the other. ‘What misfortune has happened
then?’ asked he. ‘Ah, dear Hans,’ said Elsie, ‘if we marry each other
and have a child, and he is big, and we perhaps send him here to draw
something to drink, then the pick-axe which has been left up there might
dash his brains out if it were to fall down, so have we not reason to
weep?’ ‘Come,’ said Hans, ‘more understanding than that is not needed
for my household, as you are such a clever Elsie, I will have you,’ and
seized her hand, took her upstairs with him, and married her.

After Hans had had her some time, he said: ‘Wife, I am going out to work
and earn some money for us; go into the field and cut the corn that we
may have some bread.’ ‘Yes, dear Hans, I will do that.’ After Hans had
gone away, she cooked herself some good broth and took it into the field
with her. When she came to the field she said to herself: ‘What shall I
do; shall I cut first, or shall I eat first? Oh, I will eat first.’ Then
she drank her cup of broth and when she was fully satisfied, she once
more said: ‘What shall I do? Shall I cut first, or shall I sleep first?
I will sleep first.’ Then she lay down among the corn and fell asleep.
Hans had been at home for a long time, but Elsie did not come; then said
he: ‘What a clever Elsie I have; she is so industrious that she does not
even come home to eat.’ But when evening came and she still stayed away,
Hans went out to see what she had cut, but nothing was cut, and she
was lying among the corn asleep. Then Hans hastened home and brought
a fowler’s net with little bells and hung it round about her, and she
still went on sleeping. Then he ran home, shut the house-door, and sat
down in his chair and worked. At length, when it was quite dark, Clever
Elsie awoke and when she got up there was a jingling all round about
her, and the bells rang at each step which she took. Then she was
alarmed, and became uncertain whether she really was Clever Elsie or
not, and said: ‘Is it I, or is it not I?’ But she knew not what answer
to make to this, and stood for a time in doubt; at length she thought:
‘I will go home and ask if it be I, or if it be not I, they will be sure
to know.’ She ran to the door of her own house, but it was shut; then
she knocked at the window and cried: ‘Hans, is Elsie within?’ ‘Yes,’
answered Hans, ‘she is within.’ Hereupon she was terrified, and said:
‘Ah, heavens! Then it is not I,’ and went to another door; but when the
people heard the jingling of the bells they would not open it, and she
could get in nowhere. Then she ran out of the village, and no one has
seen her since.




THE MISER IN THE BUSH

A farmer had a faithful and diligent servant, who had worked hard for
him three years, without having been paid any wages. At last it came
into the man’s head that he would not go on thus without pay any longer;
so he went to his master, and said, ‘I have worked hard for you a long
time, I will trust to you to give me what I deserve to have for my
trouble.’ The farmer was a sad miser, and knew that his man was very
simple-hearted; so he took out threepence, and gave him for every year’s
service a penny. The poor fellow thought it was a great deal of money to
have, and said to himself, ‘Why should I work hard, and live here on bad
fare any longer? I can now travel into the wide world, and make myself
merry.’ With that he put his money into his purse, and set out, roaming
over hill and valley.

As he jogged along over the fields, singing and dancing, a little dwarf
met him, and asked him what made him so merry. ‘Why, what should make
me down-hearted?’ said he; ‘I am sound in health and rich in purse, what
should I care for? I have saved up my three years’ earnings and have it
all safe in my pocket.’ ‘How much may it come to?’ said the little man.
‘Full threepence,’ replied the countryman. ‘I wish you would give them
to me,’ said the other; ‘I am very poor.’ Then the man pitied him, and
gave him all he had; and the little dwarf said in return, ‘As you have
such a kind honest heart, I will grant you three wishes--one for every
penny; so choose whatever you like.’ Then the countryman rejoiced at
his good luck, and said, ‘I like many things better than money: first, I
will have a bow that will bring down everything I shoot at; secondly,
a fiddle that will set everyone dancing that hears me play upon it; and
thirdly, I should like that everyone should grant what I ask.’ The dwarf
said he should have his three wishes; so he gave him the bow and fiddle,
and went his way.

Our honest friend journeyed on his way too; and if he was merry before,
he was now ten times more so. He had not gone far before he met an old
miser: close by them stood a tree, and on the topmost twig sat a thrush
singing away most joyfully. ‘Oh, what a pretty bird!’ said the miser; ‘I
would give a great deal of money to have such a one.’ ‘If that’s all,’
said the countryman, ‘I will soon bring it down.’ Then he took up his
bow, and down fell the thrush into the bushes at the foot of the tree.
The miser crept into the bush to find it; but directly he had got into
the middle, his companion took up his fiddle and played away, and the
miser began to dance and spring about, capering higher and higher in
the air. The thorns soon began to tear his clothes till they all hung
in rags about him, and he himself was all scratched and wounded, so that
the blood ran down. ‘Oh, for heaven’s sake!’ cried the miser, ‘Master!
master! pray let the fiddle alone. What have I done to deserve this?’
‘Thou hast shaved many a poor soul close enough,’ said the other; ‘thou
art only meeting thy reward’: so he played up another tune. Then the
miser began to beg and promise, and offered money for his liberty; but
he did not come up to the musician’s price for some time, and he danced
him along brisker and brisker, and the miser bid higher and higher, till
at last he offered a round hundred of florins that he had in his purse,
and had just gained by cheating some poor fellow. When the countryman
saw so much money, he said, ‘I will agree to your proposal.’ So he took
the purse, put up his fiddle, and travelled on very pleased with his
bargain.

Meanwhile the miser crept out of the bush half-naked and in a piteous
plight, and began to ponder how he should take his revenge, and serve
his late companion some trick. At last he went to the judge, and
complained that a rascal had robbed him of his money, and beaten him
into the bargain; and that the fellow who did it carried a bow at his
back and a fiddle hung round his neck. Then the judge sent out his
officers to bring up the accused wherever they should find him; and he
was soon caught and brought up to be tried.

The miser began to tell his tale, and said he had been robbed of
his money. ‘No, you gave it me for playing a tune to you.’ said the
countryman; but the judge told him that was not likely, and cut the
matter short by ordering him off to the gallows.

So away he was taken; but as he stood on the steps he said, ‘My Lord
Judge, grant me one last request.’ ‘Anything but thy life,’ replied the
other. ‘No,’ said he, ‘I do not ask my life; only to let me play upon
my fiddle for the last time.’ The miser cried out, ‘Oh, no! no! for
heaven’s sake don’t listen to him! don’t listen to him!’ But the judge
said, ‘It is only this once, he will soon have done.’ The fact was, he
could not refuse the request, on account of the dwarf’s third gift.

Then the miser said, ‘Bind me fast, bind me fast, for pity’s sake.’ But
the countryman seized his fiddle, and struck up a tune, and at the first
note judge, clerks, and jailer were in motion; all began capering, and
no one could hold the miser. At the second note the hangman let his
prisoner go, and danced also, and by the time he had played the first
bar of the tune, all were dancing together--judge, court, and miser, and
all the people who had followed to look on. At first the thing was merry
and pleasant enough; but when it had gone on a while, and there seemed
to be no end of playing or dancing, they began to cry out, and beg him
to leave off; but he stopped not a whit the more for their entreaties,
till the judge not only gave him his life, but promised to return him
the hundred florins.

Then he called to the miser, and said, ‘Tell us now, you vagabond, where
you got that gold, or I shall play on for your amusement only,’ ‘I stole
it,’ said the miser in the presence of all the people; ‘I acknowledge
that I stole it, and that you earned it fairly.’ Then the countryman
stopped his fiddle, and left the miser to take his place at the gallows.




ASHPUTTEL

The wife of a rich man fell sick; and when she felt that her end drew
nigh, she called her only daughter to her bed-side, and said, ‘Always be
a good girl, and I will look down from heaven and watch over you.’ Soon
afterwards she shut her eyes and died, and was buried in the garden;
and the little girl went every day to her grave and wept, and was always
good and kind to all about her. And the snow fell and spread a beautiful
white covering over the grave; but by the time the spring came, and the
sun had melted it away again, her father had married another wife. This
new wife had two daughters of her own, that she brought home with her;
they were fair in face but foul at heart, and it was now a sorry time
for the poor little girl. ‘What does the good-for-nothing want in the
parlour?’ said they; ‘they who would eat bread should first earn it;
away with the kitchen-maid!’ Then they took away her fine clothes, and
gave her an old grey frock to put on, and laughed at her, and turned her
into the kitchen.

There she was forced to do hard work; to rise early before daylight, to
bring the water, to make the fire, to cook and to wash. Besides that,
the sisters plagued her in all sorts of ways, and laughed at her. In the
evening when she was tired, she had no bed to lie down on, but was made
to lie by the hearth among the ashes; and as this, of course, made her
always dusty and dirty, they called her Ashputtel.

It happened once that the father was going to the fair, and asked his
wife’s daughters what he should bring them. ‘Fine clothes,’ said the
first; ‘Pearls and diamonds,’ cried the second. ‘Now, child,’ said he
to his own daughter, ‘what will you have?’ ‘The first twig, dear
father, that brushes against your hat when you turn your face to come
homewards,’ said she. Then he bought for the first two the fine clothes
and pearls and diamonds they had asked for: and on his way home, as he
rode through a green copse, a hazel twig brushed against him, and almost
pushed off his hat: so he broke it off and brought it away; and when he
got home he gave it to his daughter. Then she took it, and went to
her mother’s grave and planted it there; and cried so much that it was
watered with her tears; and there it grew and became a fine tree. Three
times every day she went to it and cried; and soon a little bird came
and built its nest upon the tree, and talked with her, and watched over
her, and brought her whatever she wished for.

Now it happened that the king of that land held a feast, which was to
last three days; and out of those who came to it his son was to choose
a bride for himself. Ashputtel’s two sisters were asked to come; so they
called her up, and said, ‘Now, comb our hair, brush our shoes, and tie
our sashes for us, for we are going to dance at the king’s feast.’
Then she did as she was told; but when all was done she could not help
crying, for she thought to herself, she should so have liked to have
gone with them to the ball; and at last she begged her mother very hard
to let her go. ‘You, Ashputtel!’ said she; ‘you who have nothing to
wear, no clothes at all, and who cannot even dance--you want to go to
the ball? And when she kept on begging, she said at last, to get rid of
her, ‘I will throw this dishful of peas into the ash-heap, and if in
two hours’ time you have picked them all out, you shall go to the feast
too.’

Then she threw the peas down among the ashes, but the little maiden ran
out at the back door into the garden, and cried out:

 ‘Hither, hither, through the sky,
  Turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
  Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hither, hither, haste away!
  One and all come help me, quick!
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’

Then first came two white doves, flying in at the kitchen window; next
came two turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under
heaven, chirping and fluttering in: and they flew down into the ashes.
And the little doves stooped their heads down and set to work, pick,
pick, pick; and then the others began to pick, pick, pick: and among
them all they soon picked out all the good grain, and put it into a dish
but left the ashes. Long before the end of the hour the work was quite
done, and all flew out again at the windows.

Then Ashputtel brought the dish to her mother, overjoyed at the thought
that now she should go to the ball. But the mother said, ‘No, no! you
slut, you have no clothes, and cannot dance; you shall not go.’ And when
Ashputtel begged very hard to go, she said, ‘If you can in one hour’s
time pick two of those dishes of peas out of the ashes, you shall go
too.’ And thus she thought she should at least get rid of her. So she
shook two dishes of peas into the ashes.

But the little maiden went out into the garden at the back of the house,
and cried out as before:

 ‘Hither, hither, through the sky,
  Turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
  Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hither, hither, haste away!
  One and all come help me, quick!
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’

Then first came two white doves in at the kitchen window; next came two
turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under heaven,
chirping and hopping about. And they flew down into the ashes; and the
little doves put their heads down and set to work, pick, pick, pick; and
then the others began pick, pick, pick; and they put all the good grain
into the dishes, and left all the ashes. Before half an hour’s time all
was done, and out they flew again. And then Ashputtel took the dishes to
her mother, rejoicing to think that she should now go to the ball.
But her mother said, ‘It is all of no use, you cannot go; you have no
clothes, and cannot dance, and you would only put us to shame’: and off
she went with her two daughters to the ball.

Now when all were gone, and nobody left at home, Ashputtel went
sorrowfully and sat down under the hazel-tree, and cried out:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

Then her friend the bird flew out of the tree, and brought a gold and
silver dress for her, and slippers of spangled silk; and she put them
on, and followed her sisters to the feast. But they did not know her,
and thought it must be some strange princess, she looked so fine and
beautiful in her rich clothes; and they never once thought of Ashputtel,
taking it for granted that she was safe at home in the dirt.

The king’s son soon came up to her, and took her by the hand and danced
with her, and no one else: and he never left her hand; but when anyone
else came to ask her to dance, he said, ‘This lady is dancing with me.’

Thus they danced till a late hour of the night; and then she wanted to
go home: and the king’s son said, ‘I shall go and take care of you to
your home’; for he wanted to see where the beautiful maiden lived. But
she slipped away from him, unawares, and ran off towards home; and as
the prince followed her, she jumped up into the pigeon-house and shut
the door. Then he waited till her father came home, and told him that
the unknown maiden, who had been at the feast, had hid herself in the
pigeon-house. But when they had broken open the door they found no one
within; and as they came back into the house, Ashputtel was lying, as
she always did, in her dirty frock by the ashes, and her dim little
lamp was burning in the chimney. For she had run as quickly as she could
through the pigeon-house and on to the hazel-tree, and had there taken
off her beautiful clothes, and put them beneath the tree, that the bird
might carry them away, and had lain down again amid the ashes in her
little grey frock.

The next day when the feast was again held, and her father, mother, and
sisters were gone, Ashputtel went to the hazel-tree, and said:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

And the bird came and brought a still finer dress than the one she
had worn the day before. And when she came in it to the ball, everyone
wondered at her beauty: but the king’s son, who was waiting for her,
took her by the hand, and danced with her; and when anyone asked her to
dance, he said as before, ‘This lady is dancing with me.’

When night came she wanted to go home; and the king’s son followed here
as before, that he might see into what house she went: but she sprang
away from him all at once into the garden behind her father’s house.
In this garden stood a fine large pear-tree full of ripe fruit; and
Ashputtel, not knowing where to hide herself, jumped up into it without
being seen. Then the king’s son lost sight of her, and could not find
out where she was gone, but waited till her father came home, and said
to him, ‘The unknown lady who danced with me has slipped away, and I
think she must have sprung into the pear-tree.’ The father thought to
himself, ‘Can it be Ashputtel?’ So he had an axe brought; and they cut
down the tree, but found no one upon it. And when they came back into
the kitchen, there lay Ashputtel among the ashes; for she had slipped
down on the other side of the tree, and carried her beautiful clothes
back to the bird at the hazel-tree, and then put on her little grey
frock.

The third day, when her father and mother and sisters were gone, she
went again into the garden, and said:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

Then her kind friend the bird brought a dress still finer than the
former one, and slippers which were all of gold: so that when she came
to the feast no one knew what to say, for wonder at her beauty: and the
king’s son danced with nobody but her; and when anyone else asked her to
dance, he said, ‘This lady is _my_ partner, sir.’

When night came she wanted to go home; and the king’s son would go with
her, and said to himself, ‘I will not lose her this time’; but, however,
she again slipped away from him, though in such a hurry that she dropped
her left golden slipper upon the stairs.

The prince took the shoe, and went the next day to the king his father,
and said, ‘I will take for my wife the lady that this golden slipper
fits.’ Then both the sisters were overjoyed to hear it; for they
had beautiful feet, and had no doubt that they could wear the golden
slipper. The eldest went first into the room where the slipper was, and
wanted to try it on, and the mother stood by. But her great toe could
not go into it, and the shoe was altogether much too small for her. Then
the mother gave her a knife, and said, ‘Never mind, cut it off; when you
are queen you will not care about toes; you will not want to walk.’ So
the silly girl cut off her great toe, and thus squeezed on the shoe,
and went to the king’s son. Then he took her for his bride, and set her
beside him on his horse, and rode away with her homewards.

But on their way home they had to pass by the hazel-tree that Ashputtel
had planted; and on the branch sat a little dove singing:

 ‘Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
  The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
  Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
  For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’

Then the prince got down and looked at her foot; and he saw, by the
blood that streamed from it, what a trick she had played him. So he
turned his horse round, and brought the false bride back to her home,
and said, ‘This is not the right bride; let the other sister try and put
on the slipper.’ Then she went into the room and got her foot into the
shoe, all but the heel, which was too large. But her mother squeezed it
in till the blood came, and took her to the king’s son: and he set her
as his bride by his side on his horse, and rode away with her.

But when they came to the hazel-tree the little dove sat there still,
and sang:

 ‘Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
  The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
  Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
  For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’

Then he looked down, and saw that the blood streamed so much from the
shoe, that her white stockings were quite red. So he turned his horse
and brought her also back again. ‘This is not the true bride,’ said he
to the father; ‘have you no other daughters?’ ‘No,’ said he; ‘there is
only a little dirty Ashputtel here, the child of my first wife; I am
sure she cannot be the bride.’ The prince told him to send her. But the
mother said, ‘No, no, she is much too dirty; she will not dare to show
herself.’ However, the prince would have her come; and she first washed
her face and hands, and then went in and curtsied to him, and he reached
her the golden slipper. Then she took her clumsy shoe off her left foot,
and put on the golden slipper; and it fitted her as if it had been made
for her. And when he drew near and looked at her face he knew her, and
said, ‘This is the right bride.’ But the mother and both the sisters
were frightened, and turned pale with anger as he took Ashputtel on his
horse, and rode away with her. And when they came to the hazel-tree, the
white dove sang:

 ‘Home! home! look at the shoe!
  Princess! the shoe was made for you!
  Prince! prince! take home thy bride,
  For she is the true one that sits by thy side!’

And when the dove had done its song, it came flying, and perched upon
her right shoulder, and so went home with her.




THE WHITE SNAKE

A long time ago there lived a king who was famed for his wisdom through
all the land. Nothing was hidden from him, and it seemed as if news of
the most secret things was brought to him through the air. But he had a
strange custom; every day after dinner, when the table was cleared,
and no one else was present, a trusty servant had to bring him one more
dish. It was covered, however, and even the servant did not know what
was in it, neither did anyone know, for the king never took off the
cover to eat of it until he was quite alone.

This had gone on for a long time, when one day the servant, who took
away the dish, was overcome with such curiosity that he could not help
carrying the dish into his room. When he had carefully locked the door,
he lifted up the cover, and saw a white snake lying on the dish. But
when he saw it he could not deny himself the pleasure of tasting it,
so he cut of a little bit and put it into his mouth. No sooner had it
touched his tongue than he heard a strange whispering of little voices
outside his window. He went and listened, and then noticed that it was
the sparrows who were chattering together, and telling one another of
all kinds of things which they had seen in the fields and woods. Eating
the snake had given him power of understanding the language of animals.

Now it so happened that on this very day the queen lost her most
beautiful ring, and suspicion of having stolen it fell upon this trusty
servant, who was allowed to go everywhere. The king ordered the man to
be brought before him, and threatened with angry words that unless he
could before the morrow point out the thief, he himself should be looked
upon as guilty and executed. In vain he declared his innocence; he was
dismissed with no better answer.

In his trouble and fear he went down into the courtyard and took thought
how to help himself out of his trouble. Now some ducks were sitting
together quietly by a brook and taking their rest; and, whilst they
were making their feathers smooth with their bills, they were having a
confidential conversation together. The servant stood by and listened.
They were telling one another of all the places where they had been
waddling about all the morning, and what good food they had found; and
one said in a pitiful tone: ‘Something lies heavy on my stomach; as
I was eating in haste I swallowed a ring which lay under the queen’s
window.’ The servant at once seized her by the neck, carried her to the
kitchen, and said to the cook: ‘Here is a fine duck; pray, kill her.’
‘Yes,’ said the cook, and weighed her in his hand; ‘she has spared
no trouble to fatten herself, and has been waiting to be roasted long
enough.’ So he cut off her head, and as she was being dressed for the
spit, the queen’s ring was found inside her.

The servant could now easily prove his innocence; and the king, to make
amends for the wrong, allowed him to ask a favour, and promised him
the best place in the court that he could wish for. The servant refused
everything, and only asked for a horse and some money for travelling, as
he had a mind to see the world and go about a little. When his request
was granted he set out on his way, and one day came to a pond, where he
saw three fishes caught in the reeds and gasping for water. Now, though
it is said that fishes are dumb, he heard them lamenting that they must
perish so miserably, and, as he had a kind heart, he got off his
horse and put the three prisoners back into the water. They leapt with
delight, put out their heads, and cried to him: ‘We will remember you
and repay you for saving us!’

He rode on, and after a while it seemed to him that he heard a voice in
the sand at his feet. He listened, and heard an ant-king complain: ‘Why
cannot folks, with their clumsy beasts, keep off our bodies? That stupid
horse, with his heavy hoofs, has been treading down my people without
mercy!’ So he turned on to a side path and the ant-king cried out to
him: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves another!’

The path led him into a wood, and there he saw two old ravens standing
by their nest, and throwing out their young ones. ‘Out with you, you
idle, good-for-nothing creatures!’ cried they; ‘we cannot find food for
you any longer; you are big enough, and can provide for yourselves.’
But the poor young ravens lay upon the ground, flapping their wings, and
crying: ‘Oh, what helpless chicks we are! We must shift for ourselves,
and yet we cannot fly! What can we do, but lie here and starve?’ So the
good young fellow alighted and killed his horse with his sword, and gave
it to them for food. Then they came hopping up to it, satisfied their
hunger, and cried: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves
another!’

And now he had to use his own legs, and when he had walked a long
way, he came to a large city. There was a great noise and crowd in
the streets, and a man rode up on horseback, crying aloud: ‘The king’s
daughter wants a husband; but whoever seeks her hand must perform a hard
task, and if he does not succeed he will forfeit his life.’ Many had
already made the attempt, but in vain; nevertheless when the youth
saw the king’s daughter he was so overcome by her great beauty that he
forgot all danger, went before the king, and declared himself a suitor.

So he was led out to the sea, and a gold ring was thrown into it, before
his eyes; then the king ordered him to fetch this ring up from the
bottom of the sea, and added: ‘If you come up again without it you will
be thrown in again and again until you perish amid the waves.’ All the
people grieved for the handsome youth; then they went away, leaving him
alone by the sea.

He stood on the shore and considered what he should do, when suddenly
he saw three fishes come swimming towards him, and they were the very
fishes whose lives he had saved. The one in the middle held a mussel in
its mouth, which it laid on the shore at the youth’s feet, and when he
had taken it up and opened it, there lay the gold ring in the shell.
Full of joy he took it to the king and expected that he would grant him
the promised reward.

But when the proud princess perceived that he was not her equal in
birth, she scorned him, and required him first to perform another
task. She went down into the garden and strewed with her own hands ten
sacksful of millet-seed on the grass; then she said: ‘Tomorrow morning
before sunrise these must be picked up, and not a single grain be
wanting.’

The youth sat down in the garden and considered how it might be possible
to perform this task, but he could think of nothing, and there he sat
sorrowfully awaiting the break of day, when he should be led to death.
But as soon as the first rays of the sun shone into the garden he saw
all the ten sacks standing side by side, quite full, and not a single
grain was missing. The ant-king had come in the night with thousands
and thousands of ants, and the grateful creatures had by great industry
picked up all the millet-seed and gathered them into the sacks.

Presently the king’s daughter herself came down into the garden, and was
amazed to see that the young man had done the task she had given him.
But she could not yet conquer her proud heart, and said: ‘Although he
has performed both the tasks, he shall not be my husband until he had
brought me an apple from the Tree of Life.’ The youth did not know where
the Tree of Life stood, but he set out, and would have gone on for ever,
as long as his legs would carry him, though he had no hope of finding
it. After he had wandered through three kingdoms, he came one evening to
a wood, and lay down under a tree to sleep. But he heard a rustling in
the branches, and a golden apple fell into his hand. At the same time
three ravens flew down to him, perched themselves upon his knee, and
said: ‘We are the three young ravens whom you saved from starving; when
we had grown big, and heard that you were seeking the Golden Apple,
we flew over the sea to the end of the world, where the Tree of Life
stands, and have brought you the apple.’ The youth, full of joy, set out
homewards, and took the Golden Apple to the king’s beautiful daughter,
who had now no more excuses left to make. They cut the Apple of Life in
two and ate it together; and then her heart became full of love for him,
and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age.




THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN LITTLE KIDS

There was once upon a time an old goat who had seven little kids, and
loved them with all the love of a mother for her children. One day she
wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food. So she called all
seven to her and said: ‘Dear children, I have to go into the forest,
be on your guard against the wolf; if he comes in, he will devour you
all--skin, hair, and everything. The wretch often disguises himself, but
you will know him at once by his rough voice and his black feet.’ The
kids said: ‘Dear mother, we will take good care of ourselves; you may go
away without any anxiety.’ Then the old one bleated, and went on her way
with an easy mind.

It was not long before someone knocked at the house-door and called:
‘Open the door, dear children; your mother is here, and has brought
something back with her for each of you.’ But the little kids knew that
it was the wolf, by the rough voice. ‘We will not open the door,’ cried
they, ‘you are not our mother. She has a soft, pleasant voice, but
your voice is rough; you are the wolf!’ Then the wolf went away to a
shopkeeper and bought himself a great lump of chalk, ate this and made
his voice soft with it. Then he came back, knocked at the door of the
house, and called: ‘Open the door, dear children, your mother is here
and has brought something back with her for each of you.’ But the wolf
had laid his black paws against the window, and the children saw them
and cried: ‘We will not open the door, our mother has not black feet
like you: you are the wolf!’ Then the wolf ran to a baker and said: ‘I
have hurt my feet, rub some dough over them for me.’ And when the baker
had rubbed his feet over, he ran to the miller and said: ‘Strew some
white meal over my feet for me.’ The miller thought to himself: ‘The
wolf wants to deceive someone,’ and refused; but the wolf said: ‘If you
will not do it, I will devour you.’ Then the miller was afraid, and made
his paws white for him. Truly, this is the way of mankind.

So now the wretch went for the third time to the house-door, knocked at
it and said: ‘Open the door for me, children, your dear little mother
has come home, and has brought every one of you something back from the
forest with her.’ The little kids cried: ‘First show us your paws that
we may know if you are our dear little mother.’ Then he put his paws
in through the window and when the kids saw that they were white, they
believed that all he said was true, and opened the door. But who should
come in but the wolf! They were terrified and wanted to hide themselves.
One sprang under the table, the second into the bed, the third into the
stove, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, the
sixth under the washing-bowl, and the seventh into the clock-case. But
the wolf found them all, and used no great ceremony; one after the
other he swallowed them down his throat. The youngest, who was in
the clock-case, was the only one he did not find. When the wolf had
satisfied his appetite he took himself off, laid himself down under a
tree in the green meadow outside, and began to sleep. Soon afterwards
the old goat came home again from the forest. Ah! what a sight she saw
there! The house-door stood wide open. The table, chairs, and benches
were thrown down, the washing-bowl lay broken to pieces, and the quilts
and pillows were pulled off the bed. She sought her children, but they
were nowhere to be found. She called them one after another by name, but
no one answered. At last, when she came to the youngest, a soft voice
cried: ‘Dear mother, I am in the clock-case.’ She took the kid out, and
it told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the others. Then
you may imagine how she wept over her poor children.

At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest kid ran with her.
When they came to the meadow, there lay the wolf by the tree and snored
so loud that the branches shook. She looked at him on every side and
saw that something was moving and struggling in his gorged belly. ‘Ah,
heavens,’ she said, ‘is it possible that my poor children whom he has
swallowed down for his supper, can be still alive?’ Then the kid had to
run home and fetch scissors, and a needle and thread, and the goat cut
open the monster’s stomach, and hardly had she made one cut, than one
little kid thrust its head out, and when she had cut farther, all six
sprang out one after another, and were all still alive, and had suffered
no injury whatever, for in his greediness the monster had swallowed them
down whole. What rejoicing there was! They embraced their dear mother,
and jumped like a tailor at his wedding. The mother, however, said: ‘Now
go and look for some big stones, and we will fill the wicked beast’s
stomach with them while he is still asleep.’ Then the seven kids dragged
the stones thither with all speed, and put as many of them into this
stomach as they could get in; and the mother sewed him up again in the
greatest haste, so that he was not aware of anything and never once
stirred.

When the wolf at length had had his fill of sleep, he got on his legs,
and as the stones in his stomach made him very thirsty, he wanted to
go to a well to drink. But when he began to walk and to move about, the
stones in his stomach knocked against each other and rattled. Then cried
he:

 ‘What rumbles and tumbles
  Against my poor bones?
  I thought ‘twas six kids,
  But it feels like big stones.’

And when he got to the well and stooped over the water to drink, the
heavy stones made him fall in, and he drowned miserably. When the seven
kids saw that, they came running to the spot and cried aloud: ‘The wolf
is dead! The wolf is dead!’ and danced for joy round about the well with
their mother.




THE QUEEN BEE

Two kings’ sons once upon a time went into the world to seek their
fortunes; but they soon fell into a wasteful foolish way of living, so
that they could not return home again. Then their brother, who was a
little insignificant dwarf, went out to seek for his brothers: but when
he had found them they only laughed at him, to think that he, who was so
young and simple, should try to travel through the world, when they, who
were so much wiser, had been unable to get on. However, they all set
out on their journey together, and came at last to an ant-hill. The two
elder brothers would have pulled it down, in order to see how the poor
ants in their fright would run about and carry off their eggs. But the
little dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, I will not
suffer you to trouble them.’

So on they went, and came to a lake where many many ducks were swimming
about. The two brothers wanted to catch two, and roast them. But the
dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, you shall not kill
them.’ Next they came to a bees’-nest in a hollow tree, and there was
so much honey that it ran down the trunk; and the two brothers wanted to
light a fire under the tree and kill the bees, so as to get their honey.
But the dwarf held them back, and said, ‘Let the pretty insects enjoy
themselves, I cannot let you burn them.’

At length the three brothers came to a castle: and as they passed by the
stables they saw fine horses standing there, but all were of marble, and
no man was to be seen. Then they went through all the rooms, till they
came to a door on which were three locks: but in the middle of the door
was a wicket, so that they could look into the next room. There they saw
a little grey old man sitting at a table; and they called to him once or
twice, but he did not hear: however, they called a third time, and then
he rose and came out to them.

He said nothing, but took hold of them and led them to a beautiful
table covered with all sorts of good things: and when they had eaten and
drunk, he showed each of them to a bed-chamber.

The next morning he came to the eldest and took him to a marble table,
where there were three tablets, containing an account of the means by
which the castle might be disenchanted. The first tablet said: ‘In the
wood, under the moss, lie the thousand pearls belonging to the king’s
daughter; they must all be found: and if one be missing by set of sun,
he who seeks them will be turned into marble.’

The eldest brother set out, and sought for the pearls the whole day:
but the evening came, and he had not found the first hundred: so he was
turned into stone as the tablet had foretold.

The next day the second brother undertook the task; but he succeeded no
better than the first; for he could only find the second hundred of the
pearls; and therefore he too was turned into stone.

At last came the little dwarf’s turn; and he looked in the moss; but it
was so hard to find the pearls, and the job was so tiresome!--so he sat
down upon a stone and cried. And as he sat there, the king of the ants
(whose life he had saved) came to help him, with five thousand ants; and
it was not long before they had found all the pearls and laid them in a
heap.

The second tablet said: ‘The key of the princess’s bed-chamber must be
fished up out of the lake.’ And as the dwarf came to the brink of it,
he saw the two ducks whose lives he had saved swimming about; and they
dived down and soon brought in the key from the bottom.

The third task was the hardest. It was to choose out the youngest and
the best of the king’s three daughters. Now they were all beautiful, and
all exactly alike: but he was told that the eldest had eaten a piece of
sugar, the next some sweet syrup, and the youngest a spoonful of honey;
so he was to guess which it was that had eaten the honey.

Then came the queen of the bees, who had been saved by the little dwarf
from the fire, and she tried the lips of all three; but at last she sat
upon the lips of the one that had eaten the honey: and so the dwarf knew
which was the youngest. Thus the spell was broken, and all who had been
turned into stones awoke, and took their proper forms. And the dwarf
married the youngest and the best of the princesses, and was king after
her father’s death; but his two brothers married the other two sisters.




THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER

There was once a shoemaker, who worked very hard and was very honest:
but still he could not earn enough to live upon; and at last all he
had in the world was gone, save just leather enough to make one pair of
shoes.

Then he cut his leather out, all ready to make up the next day, meaning
to rise early in the morning to his work. His conscience was clear and
his heart light amidst all his troubles; so he went peaceably to bed,
left all his cares to Heaven, and soon fell asleep. In the morning after
he had said his prayers, he sat himself down to his work; when, to his
great wonder, there stood the shoes all ready made, upon the table. The
good man knew not what to say or think at such an odd thing happening.
He looked at the workmanship; there was not one false stitch in the
whole job; all was so neat and true, that it was quite a masterpiece.

The same day a customer came in, and the shoes suited him so well that
he willingly paid a price higher than usual for them; and the poor
shoemaker, with the money, bought leather enough to make two pairs more.
In the evening he cut out the work, and went to bed early, that he might
get up and begin betimes next day; but he was saved all the trouble, for
when he got up in the morning the work was done ready to his hand. Soon
in came buyers, who paid him handsomely for his goods, so that he bought
leather enough for four pair more. He cut out the work again overnight
and found it done in the morning, as before; and so it went on for some
time: what was got ready in the evening was always done by daybreak, and
the good man soon became thriving and well off again.

One evening, about Christmas-time, as he and his wife were sitting over
the fire chatting together, he said to her, ‘I should like to sit up and
watch tonight, that we may see who it is that comes and does my work for
me.’ The wife liked the thought; so they left a light burning, and hid
themselves in a corner of the room, behind a curtain that was hung up
there, and watched what would happen.

As soon as it was midnight, there came in two little naked dwarfs; and
they sat themselves upon the shoemaker’s bench, took up all the work
that was cut out, and began to ply with their little fingers, stitching
and rapping and tapping away at such a rate, that the shoemaker was all
wonder, and could not take his eyes off them. And on they went, till the
job was quite done, and the shoes stood ready for use upon the table.
This was long before daybreak; and then they bustled away as quick as
lightning.

The next day the wife said to the shoemaker. ‘These little wights have
made us rich, and we ought to be thankful to them, and do them a good
turn if we can. I am quite sorry to see them run about as they do; and
indeed it is not very decent, for they have nothing upon their backs to
keep off the cold. I’ll tell you what, I will make each of them a shirt,
and a coat and waistcoat, and a pair of pantaloons into the bargain; and
do you make each of them a little pair of shoes.’

The thought pleased the good cobbler very much; and one evening, when
all the things were ready, they laid them on the table, instead of the
work that they used to cut out, and then went and hid themselves, to
watch what the little elves would do.

About midnight in they came, dancing and skipping, hopped round the
room, and then went to sit down to their work as usual; but when they
saw the clothes lying for them, they laughed and chuckled, and seemed
mightily delighted.

Then they dressed themselves in the twinkling of an eye, and danced and
capered and sprang about, as merry as could be; till at last they danced
out at the door, and away over the green.

The good couple saw them no more; but everything went well with them
from that time forward, as long as they lived.




THE JUNIPER-TREE

Long, long ago, some two thousand years or so, there lived a rich
man with a good and beautiful wife. They loved each other dearly, but
sorrowed much that they had no children. So greatly did they desire
to have one, that the wife prayed for it day and night, but still they
remained childless.

In front of the house there was a court, in which grew a juniper-tree.
One winter’s day the wife stood under the tree to peel some apples, and
as she was peeling them, she cut her finger, and the blood fell on the
snow. ‘Ah,’ sighed the woman heavily, ‘if I had but a child, as red as
blood and as white as snow,’ and as she spoke the words, her heart grew
light within her, and it seemed to her that her wish was granted, and
she returned to the house feeling glad and comforted. A month passed,
and the snow had all disappeared; then another month went by, and all
the earth was green. So the months followed one another, and first the
trees budded in the woods, and soon the green branches grew thickly
intertwined, and then the blossoms began to fall. Once again the wife
stood under the juniper-tree, and it was so full of sweet scent that her
heart leaped for joy, and she was so overcome with her happiness, that
she fell on her knees. Presently the fruit became round and firm, and
she was glad and at peace; but when they were fully ripe she picked the
berries and ate eagerly of them, and then she grew sad and ill. A little
while later she called her husband, and said to him, weeping. ‘If I
die, bury me under the juniper-tree.’ Then she felt comforted and happy
again, and before another month had passed she had a little child, and
when she saw that it was as white as snow and as red as blood, her joy
was so great that she died.

Her husband buried her under the juniper-tree, and wept bitterly for
her. By degrees, however, his sorrow grew less, and although at times he
still grieved over his loss, he was able to go about as usual, and later
on he married again.

He now had a little daughter born to him; the child of his first wife
was a boy, who was as red as blood and as white as snow. The mother
loved her daughter very much, and when she looked at her and then looked
at the boy, it pierced her heart to think that he would always stand in
the way of her own child, and she was continually thinking how she could
get the whole of the property for her. This evil thought took possession
of her more and more, and made her behave very unkindly to the boy. She
drove him from place to place with cuffings and buffetings, so that the
poor child went about in fear, and had no peace from the time he left
school to the time he went back.

One day the little daughter came running to her mother in the
store-room, and said, ‘Mother, give me an apple.’ ‘Yes, my child,’ said
the wife, and she gave her a beautiful apple out of the chest; the chest
had a very heavy lid and a large iron lock.

‘Mother,’ said the little daughter again, ‘may not brother have one
too?’ The mother was angry at this, but she answered, ‘Yes, when he
comes out of school.’

Just then she looked out of the window and saw him coming, and it seemed
as if an evil spirit entered into her, for she snatched the apple out
of her little daughter’s hand, and said, ‘You shall not have one before
your brother.’ She threw the apple into the chest and shut it to. The
little boy now came in, and the evil spirit in the wife made her say
kindly to him, ‘My son, will you have an apple?’ but she gave him a
wicked look. ‘Mother,’ said the boy, ‘how dreadful you look! Yes, give
me an apple.’ The thought came to her that she would kill him. ‘Come
with me,’ she said, and she lifted up the lid of the chest; ‘take one
out for yourself.’ And as he bent over to do so, the evil spirit urged
her, and crash! down went the lid, and off went the little boy’s head.
Then she was overwhelmed with fear at the thought of what she had done.
‘If only I can prevent anyone knowing that I did it,’ she thought. So
she went upstairs to her room, and took a white handkerchief out of
her top drawer; then she set the boy’s head again on his shoulders, and
bound it with the handkerchief so that nothing could be seen, and placed
him on a chair by the door with an apple in his hand.

Soon after this, little Marleen came up to her mother who was stirring
a pot of boiling water over the fire, and said, ‘Mother, brother is
sitting by the door with an apple in his hand, and he looks so pale;
and when I asked him to give me the apple, he did not answer, and that
frightened me.’

‘Go to him again,’ said her mother, ‘and if he does not answer, give him
a box on the ear.’ So little Marleen went, and said, ‘Brother, give me
that apple,’ but he did not say a word; then she gave him a box on the
ear, and his head rolled off. She was so terrified at this, that she ran
crying and screaming to her mother. ‘Oh!’ she said, ‘I have knocked off
brother’s head,’ and then she wept and wept, and nothing would stop her.

‘What have you done!’ said her mother, ‘but no one must know about it,
so you must keep silence; what is done can’t be undone; we will make
him into puddings.’ And she took the little boy and cut him up, made him
into puddings, and put him in the pot. But Marleen stood looking on,
and wept and wept, and her tears fell into the pot, so that there was no
need of salt.

Presently the father came home and sat down to his dinner; he asked,
‘Where is my son?’ The mother said nothing, but gave him a large dish of
black pudding, and Marleen still wept without ceasing.

The father again asked, ‘Where is my son?’

‘Oh,’ answered the wife, ‘he is gone into the country to his mother’s
great uncle; he is going to stay there some time.’

‘What has he gone there for, and he never even said goodbye to me!’

‘Well, he likes being there, and he told me he should be away quite six
weeks; he is well looked after there.’

‘I feel very unhappy about it,’ said the husband, ‘in case it should not
be all right, and he ought to have said goodbye to me.’

With this he went on with his dinner, and said, ‘Little Marleen, why do
you weep? Brother will soon be back.’ Then he asked his wife for more
pudding, and as he ate, he threw the bones under the table.

Little Marleen went upstairs and took her best silk handkerchief out of
her bottom drawer, and in it she wrapped all the bones from under the
table and carried them outside, and all the time she did nothing but
weep. Then she laid them in the green grass under the juniper-tree, and
she had no sooner done so, then all her sadness seemed to leave her,
and she wept no more. And now the juniper-tree began to move, and the
branches waved backwards and forwards, first away from one another, and
then together again, as it might be someone clapping their hands for
joy. After this a mist came round the tree, and in the midst of it there
was a burning as of fire, and out of the fire there flew a beautiful
bird, that rose high into the air, singing magnificently, and when it
could no more be seen, the juniper-tree stood there as before, and the
silk handkerchief and the bones were gone.

Little Marleen now felt as lighthearted and happy as if her brother were
still alive, and she went back to the house and sat down cheerfully to
the table and ate.

The bird flew away and alighted on the house of a goldsmith and began to
sing:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

The goldsmith was in his workshop making a gold chain, when he heard the
song of the bird on his roof. He thought it so beautiful that he got
up and ran out, and as he crossed the threshold he lost one of his
slippers. But he ran on into the middle of the street, with a slipper on
one foot and a sock on the other; he still had on his apron, and still
held the gold chain and the pincers in his hands, and so he stood gazing
up at the bird, while the sun came shining brightly down on the street.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘how beautifully you sing! Sing me that song again.’

‘Nay,’ said the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing. Give that gold
chain, and I will sing it you again.’

‘Here is the chain, take it,’ said the goldsmith. ‘Only sing me that
again.’

The bird flew down and took the gold chain in his right claw, and then
he alighted again in front of the goldsmith and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

Then he flew away, and settled on the roof of a shoemaker’s house and
sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

The shoemaker heard him, and he jumped up and ran out in his
shirt-sleeves, and stood looking up at the bird on the roof with his
hand over his eyes to keep himself from being blinded by the sun.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘how beautifully you sing!’ Then he called through the
door to his wife: ‘Wife, come out; here is a bird, come and look at it
and hear how beautifully it sings.’ Then he called his daughter and the
children, then the apprentices, girls and boys, and they all ran up the
street to look at the bird, and saw how splendid it was with its red
and green feathers, and its neck like burnished gold, and eyes like two
bright stars in its head.

‘Bird,’ said the shoemaker, ‘sing me that song again.’

‘Nay,’ answered the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing; you must
give me something.’

‘Wife,’ said the man, ‘go into the garret; on the upper shelf you will
see a pair of red shoes; bring them to me.’ The wife went in and fetched
the shoes.

‘There, bird,’ said the shoemaker, ‘now sing me that song again.’

The bird flew down and took the red shoes in his left claw, and then he
went back to the roof and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

When he had finished, he flew away. He had the chain in his right claw
and the shoes in his left, and he flew right away to a mill, and the
mill went ‘Click clack, click clack, click clack.’ Inside the mill were
twenty of the miller’s men hewing a stone, and as they went ‘Hick hack,
hick hack, hick hack,’ the mill went ‘Click clack, click clack, click
clack.’

The bird settled on a lime-tree in front of the mill and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

then one of the men left off,

  My father grieved when I was gone;

two more men left off and listened,

  My sister loved me best of all;

then four more left off,

  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie

now there were only eight at work,

  Underneath

And now only five,

  the juniper-tree.

And now only one,

  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

then he looked up and the last one had left off work.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘what a beautiful song that is you sing! Let me hear it
too; sing it again.’

‘Nay,’ answered the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing; give me that
millstone, and I will sing it again.’

‘If it belonged to me alone,’ said the man, ‘you should have it.’

‘Yes, yes,’ said the others: ‘if he will sing again, he can have it.’

The bird came down, and all the twenty millers set to and lifted up the
stone with a beam; then the bird put his head through the hole and took
the stone round his neck like a collar, and flew back with it to the
tree and sang--

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

And when he had finished his song, he spread his wings, and with the
chain in his right claw, the shoes in his left, and the millstone round
his neck, he flew right away to his father’s house.

The father, the mother, and little Marleen were having their dinner.

‘How lighthearted I feel,’ said the father, ‘so pleased and cheerful.’

‘And I,’ said the mother, ‘I feel so uneasy, as if a heavy thunderstorm
were coming.’

But little Marleen sat and wept and wept.

Then the bird came flying towards the house and settled on the roof.

‘I do feel so happy,’ said the father, ‘and how beautifully the sun
shines; I feel just as if I were going to see an old friend again.’

‘Ah!’ said the wife, ‘and I am so full of distress and uneasiness that
my teeth chatter, and I feel as if there were a fire in my veins,’ and
she tore open her dress; and all the while little Marleen sat in the
corner and wept, and the plate on her knees was wet with her tears.

The bird now flew to the juniper-tree and began singing:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

the mother shut her eyes and her ears, that she might see and hear
nothing, but there was a roaring sound in her ears like that of a
violent storm, and in her eyes a burning and flashing like lightning:

  My father grieved when I was gone;

‘Look, mother,’ said the man, ‘at the beautiful bird that is singing so
magnificently; and how warm and bright the sun is, and what a delicious
scent of spice in the air!’

  My sister loved me best of all;

then little Marleen laid her head down on her knees and sobbed.

‘I must go outside and see the bird nearer,’ said the man.

‘Ah, do not go!’ cried the wife. ‘I feel as if the whole house were in
flames!’

But the man went out and looked at the bird.

 She laid her kerchief over me,
 And took my bones that they might lie
 Underneath the juniper-tree
 Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

With that the bird let fall the gold chain, and it fell just round the
man’s neck, so that it fitted him exactly.

He went inside, and said, ‘See, what a splendid bird that is; he has
given me this beautiful gold chain, and looks so beautiful himself.’

But the wife was in such fear and trouble, that she fell on the floor,
and her cap fell from her head.

Then the bird began again:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

‘Ah me!’ cried the wife, ‘if I were but a thousand feet beneath the
earth, that I might not hear that song.’

  My father grieved when I was gone;

then the woman fell down again as if dead.

  My sister loved me best of all;

‘Well,’ said little Marleen, ‘I will go out too and see if the bird will
give me anything.’

So she went out.

  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie

and he threw down the shoes to her,

  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

And she now felt quite happy and lighthearted; she put on the shoes and
danced and jumped about in them. ‘I was so miserable,’ she said, ‘when I
came out, but that has all passed away; that is indeed a splendid bird,
and he has given me a pair of red shoes.’

The wife sprang up, with her hair standing out from her head like flames
of fire. ‘Then I will go out too,’ she said, ‘and see if it will lighten
my misery, for I feel as if the world were coming to an end.’

But as she crossed the threshold, crash! the bird threw the millstone
down on her head, and she was crushed to death.

The father and little Marleen heard the sound and ran out, but they only
saw mist and flame and fire rising from the spot, and when these had
passed, there stood the little brother, and he took the father and
little Marleen by the hand; then they all three rejoiced, and went
inside together and sat down to their dinners and ate.




THE TURNIP

There were two brothers who were both soldiers; the one was rich and
the other poor. The poor man thought he would try to better himself; so,
pulling off his red coat, he became a gardener, and dug his ground well,
and sowed turnips.

When the seed came up, there was one plant bigger than all the rest; and
it kept getting larger and larger, and seemed as if it would never cease
growing; so that it might have been called the prince of turnips for
there never was such a one seen before, and never will again. At last it
was so big that it filled a cart, and two oxen could hardly draw it; and
the gardener knew not what in the world to do with it, nor whether it
would be a blessing or a curse to him. One day he said to himself, ‘What
shall I do with it? if I sell it, it will bring no more than another;
and for eating, the little turnips are better than this; the best thing
perhaps is to carry it and give it to the king as a mark of respect.’

Then he yoked his oxen, and drew the turnip to the court, and gave it
to the king. ‘What a wonderful thing!’ said the king; ‘I have seen many
strange things, but such a monster as this I never saw. Where did you
get the seed? or is it only your good luck? If so, you are a true child
of fortune.’ ‘Ah, no!’ answered the gardener, ‘I am no child of fortune;
I am a poor soldier, who never could get enough to live upon; so I
laid aside my red coat, and set to work, tilling the ground. I have a
brother, who is rich, and your majesty knows him well, and all the world
knows him; but because I am poor, everybody forgets me.’

The king then took pity on him, and said, ‘You shall be poor no
longer. I will give you so much that you shall be even richer than your
brother.’ Then he gave him gold and lands and flocks, and made him so
rich that his brother’s fortune could not at all be compared with his.

When the brother heard of all this, and how a turnip had made the
gardener so rich, he envied him sorely, and bethought himself how he
could contrive to get the same good fortune for himself. However, he
determined to manage more cleverly than his brother, and got together a
rich present of gold and fine horses for the king; and thought he must
have a much larger gift in return; for if his brother had received so
much for only a turnip, what must his present be worth?

The king took the gift very graciously, and said he knew not what to
give in return more valuable and wonderful than the great turnip; so
the soldier was forced to put it into a cart, and drag it home with him.
When he reached home, he knew not upon whom to vent his rage and spite;
and at length wicked thoughts came into his head, and he resolved to
kill his brother.

So he hired some villains to murder him; and having shown them where to
lie in ambush, he went to his brother, and said, ‘Dear brother, I have
found a hidden treasure; let us go and dig it up, and share it between
us.’ The other had no suspicions of his roguery: so they went out
together, and as they were travelling along, the murderers rushed out
upon him, bound him, and were going to hang him on a tree.

But whilst they were getting all ready, they heard the trampling of a
horse at a distance, which so frightened them that they pushed their
prisoner neck and shoulders together into a sack, and swung him up by a
cord to the tree, where they left him dangling, and ran away. Meantime
he worked and worked away, till he made a hole large enough to put out
his head.

When the horseman came up, he proved to be a student, a merry fellow,
who was journeying along on his nag, and singing as he went. As soon as
the man in the sack saw him passing under the tree, he cried out, ‘Good
morning! good morning to thee, my friend!’ The student looked about
everywhere; and seeing no one, and not knowing where the voice came
from, cried out, ‘Who calls me?’

Then the man in the tree answered, ‘Lift up thine eyes, for behold here
I sit in the sack of wisdom; here have I, in a short time, learned great
and wondrous things. Compared to this seat, all the learning of the
schools is as empty air. A little longer, and I shall know all that man
can know, and shall come forth wiser than the wisest of mankind. Here
I discern the signs and motions of the heavens and the stars; the laws
that control the winds; the number of the sands on the seashore; the
healing of the sick; the virtues of all simples, of birds, and of
precious stones. Wert thou but once here, my friend, though wouldst feel
and own the power of knowledge.

The student listened to all this and wondered much; at last he said,
‘Blessed be the day and hour when I found you; cannot you contrive to
let me into the sack for a little while?’ Then the other answered, as if
very unwillingly, ‘A little space I may allow thee to sit here, if thou
wilt reward me well and entreat me kindly; but thou must tarry yet an
hour below, till I have learnt some little matters that are yet unknown
to me.’

So the student sat himself down and waited a while; but the time hung
heavy upon him, and he begged earnestly that he might ascend forthwith,
for his thirst for knowledge was great. Then the other pretended to give
way, and said, ‘Thou must let the sack of wisdom descend, by untying
yonder cord, and then thou shalt enter.’ So the student let him down,
opened the sack, and set him free. ‘Now then,’ cried he, ‘let me ascend
quickly.’ As he began to put himself into the sack heels first, ‘Wait a
while,’ said the gardener, ‘that is not the way.’ Then he pushed him
in head first, tied up the sack, and soon swung up the searcher after
wisdom dangling in the air. ‘How is it with thee, friend?’ said he,
‘dost thou not feel that wisdom comes unto thee? Rest there in peace,
till thou art a wiser man than thou wert.’

So saying, he trotted off on the student’s nag, and left the poor fellow
to gather wisdom till somebody should come and let him down.




CLEVER HANS

The mother of Hans said: ‘Whither away, Hans?’ Hans answered: ‘To
Gretel.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh, I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’
‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day,
Hans. What do you bring that is good?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want to have
something given me.’ Gretel presents Hans with a needle, Hans says:
‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the needle, sticks it into a hay-cart, and follows the cart
home. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’
‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘Took nothing; had something
given me.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a needle.’ ‘Where is the
needle, Hans?’ ‘Stuck in the hay-cart.’ ‘That was ill done, Hans. You
should have stuck the needle in your sleeve.’ ‘Never mind, I’ll do
better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What do you bring that is
good?’ ‘I bring nothing. I want to have something given to me.’ Gretel
presents Hans with a knife. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans
takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve, and goes home. ‘Good evening,
mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ What
did you take her?’ ‘Took her nothing, she gave me something.’ ‘What did
Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a knife.’ ‘Where is the knife, Hans?’ ‘Stuck
in my sleeve.’ ‘That’s ill done, Hans, you should have put the knife in
your pocket.’ ‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good thing do you
bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents
Hans with a young goat. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans takes
the goat, ties its legs, and puts it in his pocket. When he gets home it
is suffocated. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have
you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘Took nothing, she
gave me something.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘She gave me a goat.’
‘Where is the goat, Hans?’ ‘Put it in my pocket.’ ‘That was ill done,
Hans, you should have put a rope round the goat’s neck.’ ‘Never mind,
will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good thing do you
bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents
Hans with a piece of bacon. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the bacon, ties it to a rope, and drags it away behind him.
The dogs come and devour the bacon. When he gets home, he has the rope
in his hand, and there is no longer anything hanging on to it. ‘Good
evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With
Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘I took her nothing, she gave me
something.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a bit of bacon.’ ‘Where
is the bacon, Hans?’ ‘I tied it to a rope, brought it home, dogs took
it.’ ‘That was ill done, Hans, you should have carried the bacon on your
head.’ ‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘I’ll
behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to Gretel.
‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans, What good thing do you bring?’ ‘I
bring nothing, but would have something given.’ Gretel presents Hans
with a calf. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the calf, puts it on his head, and the calf kicks his face.
‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With
Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘I took nothing, but had something
given me.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘A calf.’ ‘Where have you the
calf, Hans?’ ‘I set it on my head and it kicked my face.’ ‘That was
ill done, Hans, you should have led the calf, and put it in the stall.’
‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘I’ll
behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans comes to Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good
thing do you bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, but would have something given.’
Gretel says to Hans: ‘I will go with you.’

Hans takes Gretel, ties her to a rope, leads her to the rack, and binds
her fast. Then Hans goes to his mother. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good
evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take
her?’ ‘I took her nothing.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘She gave me
nothing, she came with me.’ ‘Where have you left Gretel?’ ‘I led her by
the rope, tied her to the rack, and scattered some grass for her.’ ‘That
was ill done, Hans, you should have cast friendly eyes on her.’ ‘Never
mind, will do better.’

Hans went into the stable, cut out all the calves’ and sheep’s eyes,
and threw them in Gretel’s face. Then Gretel became angry, tore herself
loose and ran away, and was no longer the bride of Hans.




THE THREE LANGUAGES

An aged count once lived in Switzerland, who had an only son, but he
was stupid, and could learn nothing. Then said the father: ‘Hark you,
my son, try as I will I can get nothing into your head. You must go from
hence, I will give you into the care of a celebrated master, who shall
see what he can do with you.’ The youth was sent into a strange town,
and remained a whole year with the master. At the end of this time,
he came home again, and his father asked: ‘Now, my son, what have you
learnt?’ ‘Father, I have learnt what the dogs say when they bark.’ ‘Lord
have mercy on us!’ cried the father; ‘is that all you have learnt? I
will send you into another town, to another master.’ The youth was taken
thither, and stayed a year with this master likewise. When he came back
the father again asked: ‘My son, what have you learnt?’ He answered:
‘Father, I have learnt what the birds say.’ Then the father fell into a
rage and said: ‘Oh, you lost man, you have spent the precious time and
learnt nothing; are you not ashamed to appear before my eyes? I will
send you to a third master, but if you learn nothing this time also, I
will no longer be your father.’ The youth remained a whole year with the
third master also, and when he came home again, and his father inquired:
‘My son, what have you learnt?’ he answered: ‘Dear father, I have this
year learnt what the frogs croak.’ Then the father fell into the most
furious anger, sprang up, called his people thither, and said: ‘This man
is no longer my son, I drive him forth, and command you to take him
out into the forest, and kill him.’ They took him forth, but when they
should have killed him, they could not do it for pity, and let him go,
and they cut the eyes and tongue out of a deer that they might carry
them to the old man as a token.

The youth wandered on, and after some time came to a fortress where he
begged for a night’s lodging. ‘Yes,’ said the lord of the castle, ‘if
you will pass the night down there in the old tower, go thither; but I
warn you, it is at the peril of your life, for it is full of wild dogs,
which bark and howl without stopping, and at certain hours a man has to
be given to them, whom they at once devour.’ The whole district was in
sorrow and dismay because of them, and yet no one could do anything to
stop this. The youth, however, was without fear, and said: ‘Just let me
go down to the barking dogs, and give me something that I can throw to
them; they will do nothing to harm me.’ As he himself would have it so,
they gave him some food for the wild animals, and led him down to the
tower. When he went inside, the dogs did not bark at him, but wagged
their tails quite amicably around him, ate what he set before them, and
did not hurt one hair of his head. Next morning, to the astonishment of
everyone, he came out again safe and unharmed, and said to the lord of
the castle: ‘The dogs have revealed to me, in their own language, why
they dwell there, and bring evil on the land. They are bewitched, and
are obliged to watch over a great treasure which is below in the tower,
and they can have no rest until it is taken away, and I have likewise
learnt, from their discourse, how that is to be done.’ Then all who
heard this rejoiced, and the lord of the castle said he would adopt him
as a son if he accomplished it successfully. He went down again, and
as he knew what he had to do, he did it thoroughly, and brought a chest
full of gold out with him. The howling of the wild dogs was henceforth
heard no more; they had disappeared, and the country was freed from the
trouble.

After some time he took it in his head that he would travel to Rome. On
the way he passed by a marsh, in which a number of frogs were sitting
croaking. He listened to them, and when he became aware of what they
were saying, he grew very thoughtful and sad. At last he arrived in
Rome, where the Pope had just died, and there was great doubt among
the cardinals as to whom they should appoint as his successor. They at
length agreed that the person should be chosen as pope who should be
distinguished by some divine and miraculous token. And just as that was
decided on, the young count entered into the church, and suddenly two
snow-white doves flew on his shoulders and remained sitting there. The
ecclesiastics recognized therein the token from above, and asked him on
the spot if he would be pope. He was undecided, and knew not if he were
worthy of this, but the doves counselled him to do it, and at length he
said yes. Then was he anointed and consecrated, and thus was fulfilled
what he had heard from the frogs on his way, which had so affected him,
that he was to be his Holiness the Pope. Then he had to sing a mass, and
did not know one word of it, but the two doves sat continually on his
shoulders, and said it all in his ear.




THE FOX AND THE CAT

It happened that the cat met the fox in a forest, and as she thought to
herself: ‘He is clever and full of experience, and much esteemed in the
world,’ she spoke to him in a friendly way. ‘Good day, dear Mr Fox,
how are you? How is all with you? How are you getting on in these hard
times?’ The fox, full of all kinds of arrogance, looked at the cat from
head to foot, and for a long time did not know whether he would give
any answer or not. At last he said: ‘Oh, you wretched beard-cleaner, you
piebald fool, you hungry mouse-hunter, what can you be thinking of? Have
you the cheek to ask how I am getting on? What have you learnt? How
many arts do you understand?’ ‘I understand but one,’ replied the
cat, modestly. ‘What art is that?’ asked the fox. ‘When the hounds are
following me, I can spring into a tree and save myself.’ ‘Is that all?’
said the fox. ‘I am master of a hundred arts, and have into the bargain
a sackful of cunning. You make me sorry for you; come with me, I will
teach you how people get away from the hounds.’ Just then came a hunter
with four dogs. The cat sprang nimbly up a tree, and sat down at the top
of it, where the branches and foliage quite concealed her. ‘Open your
sack, Mr Fox, open your sack,’ cried the cat to him, but the dogs had
already seized him, and were holding him fast. ‘Ah, Mr Fox,’ cried the
cat. ‘You with your hundred arts are left in the lurch! Had you been
able to climb like me, you would not have lost your life.’




THE FOUR CLEVER BROTHERS

‘Dear children,’ said a poor man to his four sons, ‘I have nothing to
give you; you must go out into the wide world and try your luck. Begin
by learning some craft or another, and see how you can get on.’ So the
four brothers took their walking-sticks in their hands, and their little
bundles on their shoulders, and after bidding their father goodbye, went
all out at the gate together. When they had got on some way they came
to four crossways, each leading to a different country. Then the eldest
said, ‘Here we must part; but this day four years we will come back
to this spot, and in the meantime each must try what he can do for
himself.’

So each brother went his way; and as the eldest was hastening on a man
met him, and asked him where he was going, and what he wanted. ‘I am
going to try my luck in the world, and should like to begin by learning
some art or trade,’ answered he. ‘Then,’ said the man, ‘go with me, and
I will teach you to become the cunningest thief that ever was.’ ‘No,’
said the other, ‘that is not an honest calling, and what can one look
to earn by it in the end but the gallows?’ ‘Oh!’ said the man, ‘you need
not fear the gallows; for I will only teach you to steal what will be
fair game: I meddle with nothing but what no one else can get or care
anything about, and where no one can find you out.’ So the young man
agreed to follow his trade, and he soon showed himself so clever, that
nothing could escape him that he had once set his mind upon.

The second brother also met a man, who, when he found out what he was
setting out upon, asked him what craft he meant to follow. ‘I do not
know yet,’ said he. ‘Then come with me, and be a star-gazer. It is a
noble art, for nothing can be hidden from you, when once you understand
the stars.’ The plan pleased him much, and he soon became such a skilful
star-gazer, that when he had served out his time, and wanted to leave
his master, he gave him a glass, and said, ‘With this you can see all
that is passing in the sky and on earth, and nothing can be hidden from
you.’

The third brother met a huntsman, who took him with him, and taught him
so well all that belonged to hunting, that he became very clever in the
craft of the woods; and when he left his master he gave him a bow, and
said, ‘Whatever you shoot at with this bow you will be sure to hit.’

The youngest brother likewise met a man who asked him what he wished to
do. ‘Would not you like,’ said he, ‘to be a tailor?’ ‘Oh, no!’ said
the young man; ‘sitting cross-legged from morning to night, working
backwards and forwards with a needle and goose, will never suit me.’
‘Oh!’ answered the man, ‘that is not my sort of tailoring; come with me,
and you will learn quite another kind of craft from that.’ Not knowing
what better to do, he came into the plan, and learnt tailoring from the
beginning; and when he left his master, he gave him a needle, and said,
‘You can sew anything with this, be it as soft as an egg or as hard as
steel; and the joint will be so fine that no seam will be seen.’

After the space of four years, at the time agreed upon, the four
brothers met at the four cross-roads; and having welcomed each other,
set off towards their father’s home, where they told him all that had
happened to them, and how each had learned some craft.

Then, one day, as they were sitting before the house under a very high
tree, the father said, ‘I should like to try what each of you can do in
this way.’ So he looked up, and said to the second son, ‘At the top of
this tree there is a chaffinch’s nest; tell me how many eggs there are
in it.’ The star-gazer took his glass, looked up, and said, ‘Five.’
‘Now,’ said the father to the eldest son, ‘take away the eggs without
letting the bird that is sitting upon them and hatching them know
anything of what you are doing.’ So the cunning thief climbed up the
tree, and brought away to his father the five eggs from under the bird;
and it never saw or felt what he was doing, but kept sitting on at its
ease. Then the father took the eggs, and put one on each corner of the
table, and the fifth in the middle, and said to the huntsman, ‘Cut all
the eggs in two pieces at one shot.’ The huntsman took up his bow, and
at one shot struck all the five eggs as his father wished.

‘Now comes your turn,’ said he to the young tailor; ‘sew the eggs and
the young birds in them together again, so neatly that the shot shall
have done them no harm.’ Then the tailor took his needle, and sewed the
eggs as he was told; and when he had done, the thief was sent to take
them back to the nest, and put them under the bird without its knowing
it. Then she went on sitting, and hatched them: and in a few days they
crawled out, and had only a little red streak across their necks, where
the tailor had sewn them together.

‘Well done, sons!’ said the old man; ‘you have made good use of your
time, and learnt something worth the knowing; but I am sure I do not
know which ought to have the prize. Oh, that a time might soon come for
you to turn your skill to some account!’

Not long after this there was a great bustle in the country; for the
king’s daughter had been carried off by a mighty dragon, and the king
mourned over his loss day and night, and made it known that whoever
brought her back to him should have her for a wife. Then the four
brothers said to each other, ‘Here is a chance for us; let us try
what we can do.’ And they agreed to see whether they could not set the
princess free. ‘I will soon find out where she is, however,’ said the
star-gazer, as he looked through his glass; and he soon cried out, ‘I
see her afar off, sitting upon a rock in the sea, and I can spy the
dragon close by, guarding her.’ Then he went to the king, and asked for
a ship for himself and his brothers; and they sailed together over the
sea, till they came to the right place. There they found the princess
sitting, as the star-gazer had said, on the rock; and the dragon was
lying asleep, with his head upon her lap. ‘I dare not shoot at him,’
said the huntsman, ‘for I should kill the beautiful young lady also.’
‘Then I will try my skill,’ said the thief, and went and stole her away
from under the dragon, so quietly and gently that the beast did not know
it, but went on snoring.

Then away they hastened with her full of joy in their boat towards the
ship; but soon came the dragon roaring behind them through the air; for
he awoke and missed the princess. But when he got over the boat, and
wanted to pounce upon them and carry off the princess, the huntsman took
up his bow and shot him straight through the heart so that he fell down
dead. They were still not safe; for he was such a great beast that in
his fall he overset the boat, and they had to swim in the open sea
upon a few planks. So the tailor took his needle, and with a few large
stitches put some of the planks together; and he sat down upon these,
and sailed about and gathered up all pieces of the boat; and then tacked
them together so quickly that the boat was soon ready, and they then
reached the ship and got home safe.

When they had brought home the princess to her father, there was great
rejoicing; and he said to the four brothers, ‘One of you shall marry
her, but you must settle amongst yourselves which it is to be.’ Then
there arose a quarrel between them; and the star-gazer said, ‘If I had
not found the princess out, all your skill would have been of no use;
therefore she ought to be mine.’ ‘Your seeing her would have been of
no use,’ said the thief, ‘if I had not taken her away from the dragon;
therefore she ought to be mine.’ ‘No, she is mine,’ said the huntsman;
‘for if I had not killed the dragon, he would, after all, have torn you
and the princess into pieces.’ ‘And if I had not sewn the boat together
again,’ said the tailor, ‘you would all have been drowned, therefore she
is mine.’ Then the king put in a word, and said, ‘Each of you is right;
and as all cannot have the young lady, the best way is for neither of
you to have her: for the truth is, there is somebody she likes a great
deal better. But to make up for your loss, I will give each of you, as a
reward for his skill, half a kingdom.’ So the brothers agreed that this
plan would be much better than either quarrelling or marrying a lady who
had no mind to have them. And the king then gave to each half a kingdom,
as he had said; and they lived very happily the rest of their days, and
took good care of their father; and somebody took better care of the
young lady, than to let either the dragon or one of the craftsmen have
her again.




LILY AND THE LION

A merchant, who had three daughters, was once setting out upon a
journey; but before he went he asked each daughter what gift he should
bring back for her. The eldest wished for pearls; the second for jewels;
but the third, who was called Lily, said, ‘Dear father, bring me a
rose.’ Now it was no easy task to find a rose, for it was the middle
of winter; yet as she was his prettiest daughter, and was very fond of
flowers, her father said he would try what he could do. So he kissed all
three, and bid them goodbye.

And when the time came for him to go home, he had bought pearls and
jewels for the two eldest, but he had sought everywhere in vain for the
rose; and when he went into any garden and asked for such a thing, the
people laughed at him, and asked him whether he thought roses grew in
snow. This grieved him very much, for Lily was his dearest child; and as
he was journeying home, thinking what he should bring her, he came to a
fine castle; and around the castle was a garden, in one half of which it
seemed to be summer-time and in the other half winter. On one side the
finest flowers were in full bloom, and on the other everything looked
dreary and buried in the snow. ‘A lucky hit!’ said he, as he called to
his servant, and told him to go to a beautiful bed of roses that was
there, and bring him away one of the finest flowers.

This done, they were riding away well pleased, when up sprang a fierce
lion, and roared out, ‘Whoever has stolen my roses shall be eaten up
alive!’ Then the man said, ‘I knew not that the garden belonged to you;
can nothing save my life?’ ‘No!’ said the lion, ‘nothing, unless you
undertake to give me whatever meets you on your return home; if you
agree to this, I will give you your life, and the rose too for your
daughter.’ But the man was unwilling to do so and said, ‘It may be my
youngest daughter, who loves me most, and always runs to meet me when
I go home.’ Then the servant was greatly frightened, and said, ‘It may
perhaps be only a cat or a dog.’ And at last the man yielded with a
heavy heart, and took the rose; and said he would give the lion whatever
should meet him first on his return.

And as he came near home, it was Lily, his youngest and dearest
daughter, that met him; she came running, and kissed him, and welcomed
him home; and when she saw that he had brought her the rose, she was
still more glad. But her father began to be very sorrowful, and to weep,
saying, ‘Alas, my dearest child! I have bought this flower at a high
price, for I have said I would give you to a wild lion; and when he has
you, he will tear you in pieces, and eat you.’ Then he told her all that
had happened, and said she should not go, let what would happen.

But she comforted him, and said, ‘Dear father, the word you have given
must be kept; I will go to the lion, and soothe him: perhaps he will let
me come safe home again.’

The next morning she asked the way she was to go, and took leave of her
father, and went forth with a bold heart into the wood. But the lion was
an enchanted prince. By day he and all his court were lions, but in the
evening they took their right forms again. And when Lily came to the
castle, he welcomed her so courteously that she agreed to marry him. The
wedding-feast was held, and they lived happily together a long time. The
prince was only to be seen as soon as evening came, and then he held his
court; but every morning he left his bride, and went away by himself,
she knew not whither, till the night came again.

After some time he said to her, ‘Tomorrow there will be a great feast in
your father’s house, for your eldest sister is to be married; and if
you wish to go and visit her my lions shall lead you thither.’ Then she
rejoiced much at the thoughts of seeing her father once more, and set
out with the lions; and everyone was overjoyed to see her, for they had
thought her dead long since. But she told them how happy she was, and
stayed till the feast was over, and then went back to the wood.

Her second sister was soon after married, and when Lily was asked to
go to the wedding, she said to the prince, ‘I will not go alone this
time--you must go with me.’ But he would not, and said that it would be
a very hazardous thing; for if the least ray of the torch-light should
fall upon him his enchantment would become still worse, for he should be
changed into a dove, and be forced to wander about the world for seven
long years. However, she gave him no rest, and said she would take care
no light should fall upon him. So at last they set out together, and
took with them their little child; and she chose a large hall with thick
walls for him to sit in while the wedding-torches were lighted; but,
unluckily, no one saw that there was a crack in the door. Then the
wedding was held with great pomp, but as the train came from the church,
and passed with the torches before the hall, a very small ray of light
fell upon the prince. In a moment he disappeared, and when his wife came
in and looked for him, she found only a white dove; and it said to her,
‘Seven years must I fly up and down over the face of the earth, but
every now and then I will let fall a white feather, that will show you
the way I am going; follow it, and at last you may overtake and set me
free.’

This said, he flew out at the door, and poor Lily followed; and every
now and then a white feather fell, and showed her the way she was to
journey. Thus she went roving on through the wide world, and looked
neither to the right hand nor to the left, nor took any rest, for seven
years. Then she began to be glad, and thought to herself that the time
was fast coming when all her troubles should end; yet repose was still
far off, for one day as she was travelling on she missed the white
feather, and when she lifted up her eyes she could nowhere see the dove.
‘Now,’ thought she to herself, ‘no aid of man can be of use to me.’ So
she went to the sun and said, ‘Thou shinest everywhere, on the hill’s
top and the valley’s depth--hast thou anywhere seen my white dove?’
‘No,’ said the sun, ‘I have not seen it; but I will give thee a
casket--open it when thy hour of need comes.’

So she thanked the sun, and went on her way till eventide; and when
the moon arose, she cried unto it, and said, ‘Thou shinest through the
night, over field and grove--hast thou nowhere seen my white dove?’
‘No,’ said the moon, ‘I cannot help thee but I will give thee an
egg--break it when need comes.’

Then she thanked the moon, and went on till the night-wind blew; and she
raised up her voice to it, and said, ‘Thou blowest through every tree
and under every leaf--hast thou not seen my white dove?’ ‘No,’ said the
night-wind, ‘but I will ask three other winds; perhaps they have seen
it.’ Then the east wind and the west wind came, and said they too had
not seen it, but the south wind said, ‘I have seen the white dove--he
has fled to the Red Sea, and is changed once more into a lion, for the
seven years are passed away, and there he is fighting with a dragon;
and the dragon is an enchanted princess, who seeks to separate him from
you.’ Then the night-wind said, ‘I will give thee counsel. Go to the
Red Sea; on the right shore stand many rods--count them, and when thou
comest to the eleventh, break it off, and smite the dragon with it; and
so the lion will have the victory, and both of them will appear to you
in their own forms. Then look round and thou wilt see a griffin, winged
like bird, sitting by the Red Sea; jump on to his back with thy beloved
one as quickly as possible, and he will carry you over the waters to
your home. I will also give thee this nut,’ continued the night-wind.
‘When you are half-way over, throw it down, and out of the waters will
immediately spring up a high nut-tree on which the griffin will be able
to rest, otherwise he would not have the strength to bear you the whole
way; if, therefore, thou dost forget to throw down the nut, he will let
you both fall into the sea.’

So our poor wanderer went forth, and found all as the night-wind had
said; and she plucked the eleventh rod, and smote the dragon, and the
lion forthwith became a prince, and the dragon a princess again. But
no sooner was the princess released from the spell, than she seized
the prince by the arm and sprang on to the griffin’s back, and went off
carrying the prince away with her.

Thus the unhappy traveller was again forsaken and forlorn; but she
took heart and said, ‘As far as the wind blows, and so long as the cock
crows, I will journey on, till I find him once again.’ She went on for
a long, long way, till at length she came to the castle whither the
princess had carried the prince; and there was a feast got ready, and
she heard that the wedding was about to be held. ‘Heaven aid me now!’
said she; and she took the casket that the sun had given her, and found
that within it lay a dress as dazzling as the sun itself. So she put it
on, and went into the palace, and all the people gazed upon her; and
the dress pleased the bride so much that she asked whether it was to be
sold. ‘Not for gold and silver.’ said she, ‘but for flesh and blood.’
The princess asked what she meant, and she said, ‘Let me speak with the
bridegroom this night in his chamber, and I will give thee the dress.’
At last the princess agreed, but she told her chamberlain to give the
prince a sleeping draught, that he might not hear or see her. When
evening came, and the prince had fallen asleep, she was led into
his chamber, and she sat herself down at his feet, and said: ‘I have
followed thee seven years. I have been to the sun, the moon, and the
night-wind, to seek thee, and at last I have helped thee to overcome
the dragon. Wilt thou then forget me quite?’ But the prince all the time
slept so soundly, that her voice only passed over him, and seemed like
the whistling of the wind among the fir-trees.

Then poor Lily was led away, and forced to give up the golden dress; and
when she saw that there was no help for her, she went out into a meadow,
and sat herself down and wept. But as she sat she bethought herself of
the egg that the moon had given her; and when she broke it, there ran
out a hen and twelve chickens of pure gold, that played about, and then
nestled under the old one’s wings, so as to form the most beautiful
sight in the world. And she rose up and drove them before her, till the
bride saw them from her window, and was so pleased that she came forth
and asked her if she would sell the brood. ‘Not for gold or silver, but
for flesh and blood: let me again this evening speak with the bridegroom
in his chamber, and I will give thee the whole brood.’

Then the princess thought to betray her as before, and agreed to
what she asked: but when the prince went to his chamber he asked
the chamberlain why the wind had whistled so in the night. And the
chamberlain told him all--how he had given him a sleeping draught, and
how a poor maiden had come and spoken to him in his chamber, and was
to come again that night. Then the prince took care to throw away the
sleeping draught; and when Lily came and began again to tell him what
woes had befallen her, and how faithful and true to him she had been,
he knew his beloved wife’s voice, and sprang up, and said, ‘You have
awakened me as from a dream, for the strange princess had thrown a spell
around me, so that I had altogether forgotten you; but Heaven hath sent
you to me in a lucky hour.’

And they stole away out of the palace by night unawares, and seated
themselves on the griffin, who flew back with them over the Red Sea.
When they were half-way across Lily let the nut fall into the water,
and immediately a large nut-tree arose from the sea, whereon the griffin
rested for a while, and then carried them safely home. There they found
their child, now grown up to be comely and fair; and after all their
troubles they lived happily together to the end of their days.




THE FOX AND THE HORSE

A farmer had a horse that had been an excellent faithful servant to
him: but he was now grown too old to work; so the farmer would give him
nothing more to eat, and said, ‘I want you no longer, so take yourself
off out of my stable; I shall not take you back again until you are
stronger than a lion.’ Then he opened the door and turned him adrift.

The poor horse was very melancholy, and wandered up and down in the
wood, seeking some little shelter from the cold wind and rain. Presently
a fox met him: ‘What’s the matter, my friend?’ said he, ‘why do you hang
down your head and look so lonely and woe-begone?’ ‘Ah!’ replied the
horse, ‘justice and avarice never dwell in one house; my master has
forgotten all that I have done for him so many years, and because I
can no longer work he has turned me adrift, and says unless I become
stronger than a lion he will not take me back again; what chance can I
have of that? he knows I have none, or he would not talk so.’

However, the fox bid him be of good cheer, and said, ‘I will help you;
lie down there, stretch yourself out quite stiff, and pretend to be
dead.’ The horse did as he was told, and the fox went straight to the
lion who lived in a cave close by, and said to him, ‘A little way off
lies a dead horse; come with me and you may make an excellent meal of
his carcase.’ The lion was greatly pleased, and set off immediately; and
when they came to the horse, the fox said, ‘You will not be able to eat
him comfortably here; I’ll tell you what--I will tie you fast to
his tail, and then you can draw him to your den, and eat him at your
leisure.’

This advice pleased the lion, so he laid himself down quietly for the
fox to make him fast to the horse. But the fox managed to tie his legs
together and bound all so hard and fast that with all his strength he
could not set himself free. When the work was done, the fox clapped the
horse on the shoulder, and said, ‘Jip! Dobbin! Jip!’ Then up he sprang,
and moved off, dragging the lion behind him. The beast began to roar
and bellow, till all the birds of the wood flew away for fright; but the
horse let him sing on, and made his way quietly over the fields to his
master’s house.

‘Here he is, master,’ said he, ‘I have got the better of him’: and when
the farmer saw his old servant, his heart relented, and he said. ‘Thou
shalt stay in thy stable and be well taken care of.’ And so the poor old
horse had plenty to eat, and lived--till he died.




THE BLUE LIGHT

There was once upon a time a soldier who for many years had served the
king faithfully, but when the war came to an end could serve no longer
because of the many wounds which he had received. The king said to him:
‘You may return to your home, I need you no longer, and you will not
receive any more money, for he only receives wages who renders me
service for them.’ Then the soldier did not know how to earn a living,
went away greatly troubled, and walked the whole day, until in the
evening he entered a forest. When darkness came on, he saw a light,
which he went up to, and came to a house wherein lived a witch. ‘Do give
me one night’s lodging, and a little to eat and drink,’ said he to
her, ‘or I shall starve.’ ‘Oho!’ she answered, ‘who gives anything to a
run-away soldier? Yet will I be compassionate, and take you in, if you
will do what I wish.’ ‘What do you wish?’ said the soldier. ‘That you
should dig all round my garden for me, tomorrow.’ The soldier consented,
and next day laboured with all his strength, but could not finish it by
the evening. ‘I see well enough,’ said the witch, ‘that you can do no
more today, but I will keep you yet another night, in payment for
which you must tomorrow chop me a load of wood, and chop it small.’ The
soldier spent the whole day in doing it, and in the evening the witch
proposed that he should stay one night more. ‘Tomorrow, you shall only
do me a very trifling piece of work. Behind my house, there is an old
dry well, into which my light has fallen, it burns blue, and never goes
out, and you shall bring it up again.’ Next day the old woman took him
to the well, and let him down in a basket. He found the blue light, and
made her a signal to draw him up again. She did draw him up, but when he
came near the edge, she stretched down her hand and wanted to take the
blue light away from him. ‘No,’ said he, perceiving her evil intention,
‘I will not give you the light until I am standing with both feet upon
the ground.’ The witch fell into a passion, let him fall again into the
well, and went away.

The poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground, and the blue
light went on burning, but of what use was that to him? He saw very well
that he could not escape death. He sat for a while very sorrowfully,
then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, which
was still half full. ‘This shall be my last pleasure,’ thought he,
pulled it out, lit it at the blue light and began to smoke. When the
smoke had circled about the cavern, suddenly a little black dwarf stood
before him, and said: ‘Lord, what are your commands?’ ‘What my commands
are?’ replied the soldier, quite astonished. ‘I must do everything you
bid me,’ said the little man. ‘Good,’ said the soldier; ‘then in the
first place help me out of this well.’ The little man took him by the
hand, and led him through an underground passage, but he did not forget
to take the blue light with him. On the way the dwarf showed him the
treasures which the witch had collected and hidden there, and the
soldier took as much gold as he could carry. When he was above, he said
to the little man: ‘Now go and bind the old witch, and carry her before
the judge.’ In a short time she came by like the wind, riding on a wild
tom-cat and screaming frightfully. Nor was it long before the little man
reappeared. ‘It is all done,’ said he, ‘and the witch is already hanging
on the gallows. What further commands has my lord?’ inquired the dwarf.
‘At this moment, none,’ answered the soldier; ‘you can return home, only
be at hand immediately, if I summon you.’ ‘Nothing more is needed than
that you should light your pipe at the blue light, and I will appear
before you at once.’ Thereupon he vanished from his sight.

The soldier returned to the town from which he came. He went to the
best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then bade the landlord
furnish him a room as handsome as possible. When it was ready and the
soldier had taken possession of it, he summoned the little black manikin
and said: ‘I have served the king faithfully, but he has dismissed me,
and left me to hunger, and now I want to take my revenge.’ ‘What am I to
do?’ asked the little man. ‘Late at night, when the king’s daughter is
in bed, bring her here in her sleep, she shall do servant’s work for
me.’ The manikin said: ‘That is an easy thing for me to do, but a very
dangerous thing for you, for if it is discovered, you will fare ill.’
When twelve o’clock had struck, the door sprang open, and the manikin
carried in the princess. ‘Aha! are you there?’ cried the soldier, ‘get
to your work at once! Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber.’ When
she had done this, he ordered her to come to his chair, and then he
stretched out his feet and said: ‘Pull off my boots,’ and then he
threw them in her face, and made her pick them up again, and clean
and brighten them. She, however, did everything he bade her, without
opposition, silently and with half-shut eyes. When the first cock
crowed, the manikin carried her back to the royal palace, and laid her
in her bed.

Next morning when the princess arose she went to her father, and told
him that she had had a very strange dream. ‘I was carried through the
streets with the rapidity of lightning,’ said she, ‘and taken into a
soldier’s room, and I had to wait upon him like a servant, sweep his
room, clean his boots, and do all kinds of menial work. It was only a
dream, and yet I am just as tired as if I really had done everything.’
‘The dream may have been true,’ said the king. ‘I will give you a piece
of advice. Fill your pocket full of peas, and make a small hole in the
pocket, and then if you are carried away again, they will fall out and
leave a track in the streets.’ But unseen by the king, the manikin was
standing beside him when he said that, and heard all. At night when
the sleeping princess was again carried through the streets, some peas
certainly did fall out of her pocket, but they made no track, for the
crafty manikin had just before scattered peas in every street there
was. And again the princess was compelled to do servant’s work until
cock-crow.

Next morning the king sent his people out to seek the track, but it was
all in vain, for in every street poor children were sitting, picking up
peas, and saying: ‘It must have rained peas, last night.’ ‘We must think
of something else,’ said the king; ‘keep your shoes on when you go to
bed, and before you come back from the place where you are taken, hide
one of them there, I will soon contrive to find it.’ The black manikin
heard this plot, and at night when the soldier again ordered him to
bring the princess, revealed it to him, and told him that he knew of no
expedient to counteract this stratagem, and that if the shoe were found
in the soldier’s house it would go badly with him. ‘Do what I bid you,’
replied the soldier, and again this third night the princess was obliged
to work like a servant, but before she went away, she hid her shoe under
the bed.

Next morning the king had the entire town searched for his daughter’s
shoe. It was found at the soldier’s, and the soldier himself, who at the
entreaty of the dwarf had gone outside the gate, was soon brought back,
and thrown into prison. In his flight he had forgotten the most valuable
things he had, the blue light and the gold, and had only one ducat in
his pocket. And now loaded with chains, he was standing at the window of
his dungeon, when he chanced to see one of his comrades passing by. The
soldier tapped at the pane of glass, and when this man came up, said to
him: ‘Be so kind as to fetch me the small bundle I have left lying in
the inn, and I will give you a ducat for doing it.’ His comrade ran
thither and brought him what he wanted. As soon as the soldier was alone
again, he lighted his pipe and summoned the black manikin. ‘Have no
fear,’ said the latter to his master. ‘Go wheresoever they take you, and
let them do what they will, only take the blue light with you.’ Next day
the soldier was tried, and though he had done nothing wicked, the judge
condemned him to death. When he was led forth to die, he begged a last
favour of the king. ‘What is it?’ asked the king. ‘That I may smoke one
more pipe on my way.’ ‘You may smoke three,’ answered the king, ‘but do
not imagine that I will spare your life.’ Then the soldier pulled out
his pipe and lighted it at the blue light, and as soon as a few wreaths
of smoke had ascended, the manikin was there with a small cudgel in his
hand, and said: ‘What does my lord command?’ ‘Strike down to earth that
false judge there, and his constable, and spare not the king who has
treated me so ill.’ Then the manikin fell on them like lightning,
darting this way and that way, and whosoever was so much as touched by
his cudgel fell to earth, and did not venture to stir again. The king
was terrified; he threw himself on the soldier’s mercy, and merely to
be allowed to live at all, gave him his kingdom for his own, and his
daughter to wife.




THE RAVEN

There was once a queen who had a little daughter, still too young to run
alone. One day the child was very troublesome, and the mother could not
quiet it, do what she would. She grew impatient, and seeing the ravens
flying round the castle, she opened the window, and said: ‘I wish you
were a raven and would fly away, then I should have a little peace.’
Scarcely were the words out of her mouth, when the child in her arms was
turned into a raven, and flew away from her through the open window. The
bird took its flight to a dark wood and remained there for a long time,
and meanwhile the parents could hear nothing of their child.

Long after this, a man was making his way through the wood when he heard
a raven calling, and he followed the sound of the voice. As he drew
near, the raven said, ‘I am by birth a king’s daughter, but am now under
the spell of some enchantment; you can, however, set me free.’ ‘What
am I to do?’ he asked. She replied, ‘Go farther into the wood until you
come to a house, wherein lives an old woman; she will offer you food and
drink, but you must not take of either; if you do, you will fall into
a deep sleep, and will not be able to help me. In the garden behind the
house is a large tan-heap, and on that you must stand and watch for me.
I shall drive there in my carriage at two o’clock in the afternoon for
three successive days; the first day it will be drawn by four white, the
second by four chestnut, and the last by four black horses; but if you
fail to keep awake and I find you sleeping, I shall not be set free.’

The man promised to do all that she wished, but the raven said, ‘Alas! I
know even now that you will take something from the woman and be unable
to save me.’ The man assured her again that he would on no account touch
a thing to eat or drink.

When he came to the house and went inside, the old woman met him, and
said, ‘Poor man! how tired you are! Come in and rest and let me give you
something to eat and drink.’

‘No,’ answered the man, ‘I will neither eat not drink.’

But she would not leave him alone, and urged him saying, ‘If you will
not eat anything, at least you might take a draught of wine; one drink
counts for nothing,’ and at last he allowed himself to be persuaded, and
drank.

As it drew towards the appointed hour, he went outside into the garden
and mounted the tan-heap to await the raven. Suddenly a feeling of
fatigue came over him, and unable to resist it, he lay down for a little
while, fully determined, however, to keep awake; but in another minute
his eyes closed of their own accord, and he fell into such a deep sleep,
that all the noises in the world would not have awakened him. At two
o’clock the raven came driving along, drawn by her four white horses;
but even before she reached the spot, she said to herself, sighing, ‘I
know he has fallen asleep.’ When she entered the garden, there she found
him as she had feared, lying on the tan-heap, fast asleep. She got out
of her carriage and went to him; she called him and shook him, but it
was all in vain, he still continued sleeping.

The next day at noon, the old woman came to him again with food and
drink which he at first refused. At last, overcome by her persistent
entreaties that he would take something, he lifted the glass and drank
again.

Towards two o’clock he went into the garden and on to the tan-heap to
watch for the raven. He had not been there long before he began to feel
so tired that his limbs seemed hardly able to support him, and he could
not stand upright any longer; so again he lay down and fell fast asleep.
As the raven drove along her four chestnut horses, she said sorrowfully
to herself, ‘I know he has fallen asleep.’ She went as before to look
for him, but he slept, and it was impossible to awaken him.

The following day the old woman said to him, ‘What is this? You are not
eating or drinking anything, do you want to kill yourself?’

He answered, ‘I may not and will not either eat or drink.’

But she put down the dish of food and the glass of wine in front of him,
and when he smelt the wine, he was unable to resist the temptation, and
took a deep draught.

When the hour came round again he went as usual on to the tan-heap in
the garden to await the king’s daughter, but he felt even more overcome
with weariness than on the two previous days, and throwing himself down,
he slept like a log. At two o’clock the raven could be seen approaching,
and this time her coachman and everything about her, as well as her
horses, were black.

She was sadder than ever as she drove along, and said mournfully, ‘I
know he has fallen asleep, and will not be able to set me free.’ She
found him sleeping heavily, and all her efforts to awaken him were of no
avail. Then she placed beside him a loaf, and some meat, and a flask
of wine, of such a kind, that however much he took of them, they would
never grow less. After that she drew a gold ring, on which her name was
engraved, off her finger, and put it upon one of his. Finally, she laid
a letter near him, in which, after giving him particulars of the food
and drink she had left for him, she finished with the following words:
‘I see that as long as you remain here you will never be able to set me
free; if, however, you still wish to do so, come to the golden castle
of Stromberg; this is well within your power to accomplish.’ She then
returned to her carriage and drove to the golden castle of Stromberg.

When the man awoke and found that he had been sleeping, he was grieved
at heart, and said, ‘She has no doubt been here and driven away again,
and it is now too late for me to save her.’ Then his eyes fell on the
things which were lying beside him; he read the letter, and knew from it
all that had happened. He rose up without delay, eager to start on his
way and to reach the castle of Stromberg, but he had no idea in which
direction he ought to go. He travelled about a long time in search of it
and came at last to a dark forest, through which he went on walking for
fourteen days and still could not find a way out. Once more the night
came on, and worn out he lay down under a bush and fell asleep. Again
the next day he pursued his way through the forest, and that evening,
thinking to rest again, he lay down as before, but he heard such a
howling and wailing that he found it impossible to sleep. He waited till
it was darker and people had begun to light up their houses, and then
seeing a little glimmer ahead of him, he went towards it.

He found that the light came from a house which looked smaller than
it really was, from the contrast of its height with that of an immense
giant who stood in front of it. He thought to himself, ‘If the giant
sees me going in, my life will not be worth much.’ However, after a
while he summoned up courage and went forward. When the giant saw him,
he called out, ‘It is lucky for that you have come, for I have not had
anything to eat for a long time. I can have you now for my supper.’ ‘I
would rather you let that alone,’ said the man, ‘for I do not willingly
give myself up to be eaten; if you are wanting food I have enough to
satisfy your hunger.’ ‘If that is so,’ replied the giant, ‘I will leave
you in peace; I only thought of eating you because I had nothing else.’

So they went indoors together and sat down, and the man brought out the
bread, meat, and wine, which although he had eaten and drunk of them,
were still unconsumed. The giant was pleased with the good cheer, and
ate and drank to his heart’s content. When he had finished his supper
the man asked him if he could direct him to the castle of Stromberg.
The giant said, ‘I will look on my map; on it are marked all the towns,
villages, and houses.’ So he fetched his map, and looked for the castle,
but could not find it. ‘Never mind,’ he said, ‘I have larger maps
upstairs in the cupboard, we will look on those,’ but they searched in
vain, for the castle was not marked even on these. The man now thought
he should like to continue his journey, but the giant begged him to
remain for a day or two longer until the return of his brother, who was
away in search of provisions. When the brother came home, they asked him
about the castle of Stromberg, and he told them he would look on his own
maps as soon as he had eaten and appeased his hunger. Accordingly, when
he had finished his supper, they all went up together to his room and
looked through his maps, but the castle was not to be found. Then he
fetched other older maps, and they went on looking for the castle until
at last they found it, but it was many thousand miles away. ‘How shall I
be able to get there?’ asked the man. ‘I have two hours to spare,’ said
the giant, ‘and I will carry you into the neighbourhood of the castle; I
must then return to look after the child who is in our care.’

The giant, thereupon, carried the man to within about a hundred leagues
of the castle, where he left him, saying, ‘You will be able to walk the
remainder of the way yourself.’ The man journeyed on day and night
till he reached the golden castle of Stromberg. He found it situated,
however, on a glass mountain, and looking up from the foot he saw the
enchanted maiden drive round her castle and then go inside. He was
overjoyed to see her, and longed to get to the top of the mountain, but
the sides were so slippery that every time he attempted to climb he
fell back again. When he saw that it was impossible to reach her, he was
greatly grieved, and said to himself, ‘I will remain here and wait for
her,’ so he built himself a little hut, and there he sat and watched for
a whole year, and every day he saw the king’s daughter driving round her
castle, but still was unable to get nearer to her.

Looking out from his hut one day he saw three robbers fighting and he
called out to them, ‘God be with you.’ They stopped when they heard the
call, but looking round and seeing nobody, they went on again with their
fighting, which now became more furious. ‘God be with you,’ he cried
again, and again they paused and looked about, but seeing no one went
back to their fighting. A third time he called out, ‘God be with you,’
and then thinking he should like to know the cause of dispute between
the three men, he went out and asked them why they were fighting so
angrily with one another. One of them said that he had found a stick,
and that he had but to strike it against any door through which he
wished to pass, and it immediately flew open. Another told him that he
had found a cloak which rendered its wearer invisible; and the third had
caught a horse which would carry its rider over any obstacle, and even
up the glass mountain. They had been unable to decide whether they
would keep together and have the things in common, or whether they would
separate. On hearing this, the man said, ‘I will give you something in
exchange for those three things; not money, for that I have not got,
but something that is of far more value. I must first, however, prove
whether all you have told me about your three things is true.’ The
robbers, therefore, made him get on the horse, and handed him the stick
and the cloak, and when he had put this round him he was no longer
visible. Then he fell upon them with the stick and beat them one after
another, crying, ‘There, you idle vagabonds, you have got what you
deserve; are you satisfied now!’

After this he rode up the glass mountain. When he reached the gate of
the castle, he found it closed, but he gave it a blow with his stick,
and it flew wide open at once and he passed through. He mounted the
steps and entered the room where the maiden was sitting, with a golden
goblet full of wine in front of her. She could not see him for he still
wore his cloak. He took the ring which she had given him off his finger,
and threw it into the goblet, so that it rang as it touched the bottom.
‘That is my own ring,’ she exclaimed, ‘and if that is so the man must
also be here who is coming to set me free.’

She sought for him about the castle, but could find him nowhere.
Meanwhile he had gone outside again and mounted his horse and thrown off
the cloak. When therefore she came to the castle gate she saw him, and
cried aloud for joy. Then he dismounted and took her in his arms; and
she kissed him, and said, ‘Now you have indeed set me free, and tomorrow
we will celebrate our marriage.’




THE GOLDEN GOOSE

There was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was called
Dummling,[*] and was despised, mocked, and sneered at on every occasion.

It happened that the eldest wanted to go into the forest to hew wood,
and before he went his mother gave him a beautiful sweet cake and a
bottle of wine in order that he might not suffer from hunger or thirst.

When he entered the forest he met a little grey-haired old man who bade
him good day, and said: ‘Do give me a piece of cake out of your pocket,
and let me have a draught of your wine; I am so hungry and thirsty.’ But
the clever son answered: ‘If I give you my cake and wine, I shall have
none for myself; be off with you,’ and he left the little man standing
and went on.

But when he began to hew down a tree, it was not long before he made a
false stroke, and the axe cut him in the arm, so that he had to go home
and have it bound up. And this was the little grey man’s doing.

After this the second son went into the forest, and his mother gave him,
like the eldest, a cake and a bottle of wine. The little old grey man
met him likewise, and asked him for a piece of cake and a drink of wine.
But the second son, too, said sensibly enough: ‘What I give you will be
taken away from myself; be off!’ and he left the little man standing and
went on. His punishment, however, was not delayed; when he had made a
few blows at the tree he struck himself in the leg, so that he had to be
carried home.

Then Dummling said: ‘Father, do let me go and cut wood.’ The father
answered: ‘Your brothers have hurt themselves with it, leave it alone,
you do not understand anything about it.’ But Dummling begged so long
that at last he said: ‘Just go then, you will get wiser by hurting
yourself.’ His mother gave him a cake made with water and baked in the
cinders, and with it a bottle of sour beer.

When he came to the forest the little old grey man met him likewise,
and greeting him, said: ‘Give me a piece of your cake and a drink out
of your bottle; I am so hungry and thirsty.’ Dummling answered: ‘I have
only cinder-cake and sour beer; if that pleases you, we will sit
down and eat.’ So they sat down, and when Dummling pulled out his
cinder-cake, it was a fine sweet cake, and the sour beer had become good
wine. So they ate and drank, and after that the little man said: ‘Since
you have a good heart, and are willing to divide what you have, I will
give you good luck. There stands an old tree, cut it down, and you will
find something at the roots.’ Then the little man took leave of him.

Dummling went and cut down the tree, and when it fell there was a goose
sitting in the roots with feathers of pure gold. He lifted her up, and
taking her with him, went to an inn where he thought he would stay the
night. Now the host had three daughters, who saw the goose and were
curious to know what such a wonderful bird might be, and would have
liked to have one of its golden feathers.

The eldest thought: ‘I shall soon find an opportunity of pulling out a
feather,’ and as soon as Dummling had gone out she seized the goose by
the wing, but her finger and hand remained sticking fast to it.

The second came soon afterwards, thinking only of how she might get a
feather for herself, but she had scarcely touched her sister than she
was held fast.

At last the third also came with the like intent, and the others
screamed out: ‘Keep away; for goodness’ sake keep away!’ But she did
not understand why she was to keep away. ‘The others are there,’ she
thought, ‘I may as well be there too,’ and ran to them; but as soon as
she had touched her sister, she remained sticking fast to her. So they
had to spend the night with the goose.

The next morning Dummling took the goose under his arm and set out,
without troubling himself about the three girls who were hanging on to
it. They were obliged to run after him continually, now left, now right,
wherever his legs took him.

In the middle of the fields the parson met them, and when he saw the
procession he said: ‘For shame, you good-for-nothing girls, why are you
running across the fields after this young man? Is that seemly?’ At the
same time he seized the youngest by the hand in order to pull her away,
but as soon as he touched her he likewise stuck fast, and was himself
obliged to run behind.

Before long the sexton came by and saw his master, the parson, running
behind three girls. He was astonished at this and called out: ‘Hi!
your reverence, whither away so quickly? Do not forget that we have a
christening today!’ and running after him he took him by the sleeve, but
was also held fast to it.

Whilst the five were trotting thus one behind the other, two labourers
came with their hoes from the fields; the parson called out to them
and begged that they would set him and the sexton free. But they had
scarcely touched the sexton when they were held fast, and now there were
seven of them running behind Dummling and the goose.

Soon afterwards he came to a city, where a king ruled who had a daughter
who was so serious that no one could make her laugh. So he had put forth
a decree that whosoever should be able to make her laugh should marry
her. When Dummling heard this, he went with his goose and all her train
before the king’s daughter, and as soon as she saw the seven people
running on and on, one behind the other, she began to laugh quite
loudly, and as if she would never stop. Thereupon Dummling asked to have
her for his wife; but the king did not like the son-in-law, and made all
manner of excuses and said he must first produce a man who could drink
a cellarful of wine. Dummling thought of the little grey man, who could
certainly help him; so he went into the forest, and in the same place
where he had felled the tree, he saw a man sitting, who had a very
sorrowful face. Dummling asked him what he was taking to heart so
sorely, and he answered: ‘I have such a great thirst and cannot quench
it; cold water I cannot stand, a barrel of wine I have just emptied, but
that to me is like a drop on a hot stone!’

‘There, I can help you,’ said Dummling, ‘just come with me and you shall
be satisfied.’

He led him into the king’s cellar, and the man bent over the huge
barrels, and drank and drank till his loins hurt, and before the day was
out he had emptied all the barrels. Then Dummling asked once more
for his bride, but the king was vexed that such an ugly fellow, whom
everyone called Dummling, should take away his daughter, and he made a
new condition; he must first find a man who could eat a whole mountain
of bread. Dummling did not think long, but went straight into the
forest, where in the same place there sat a man who was tying up his
body with a strap, and making an awful face, and saying: ‘I have eaten a
whole ovenful of rolls, but what good is that when one has such a hunger
as I? My stomach remains empty, and I must tie myself up if I am not to
die of hunger.’

At this Dummling was glad, and said: ‘Get up and come with me; you shall
eat yourself full.’ He led him to the king’s palace where all the
flour in the whole Kingdom was collected, and from it he caused a huge
mountain of bread to be baked. The man from the forest stood before it,
began to eat, and by the end of one day the whole mountain had vanished.
Then Dummling for the third time asked for his bride; but the king again
sought a way out, and ordered a ship which could sail on land and on
water. ‘As soon as you come sailing back in it,’ said he, ‘you shall
have my daughter for wife.’

Dummling went straight into the forest, and there sat the little grey
man to whom he had given his cake. When he heard what Dummling wanted,
he said: ‘Since you have given me to eat and to drink, I will give you
the ship; and I do all this because you once were kind to me.’ Then he
gave him the ship which could sail on land and water, and when the king
saw that, he could no longer prevent him from having his daughter. The
wedding was celebrated, and after the king’s death, Dummling inherited
his kingdom and lived for a long time contentedly with his wife.

     [*] Simpleton




THE WATER OF LIFE

Long before you or I were born, there reigned, in a country a great way
off, a king who had three sons. This king once fell very ill--so ill
that nobody thought he could live. His sons were very much grieved
at their father’s sickness; and as they were walking together very
mournfully in the garden of the palace, a little old man met them and
asked what was the matter. They told him that their father was very ill,
and that they were afraid nothing could save him. ‘I know what would,’
said the little old man; ‘it is the Water of Life. If he could have a
draught of it he would be well again; but it is very hard to get.’ Then
the eldest son said, ‘I will soon find it’: and he went to the sick
king, and begged that he might go in search of the Water of Life, as
it was the only thing that could save him. ‘No,’ said the king. ‘I had
rather die than place you in such great danger as you must meet with in
your journey.’ But he begged so hard that the king let him go; and the
prince thought to himself, ‘If I bring my father this water, he will
make me sole heir to his kingdom.’

Then he set out: and when he had gone on his way some time he came to a
deep valley, overhung with rocks and woods; and as he looked around, he
saw standing above him on one of the rocks a little ugly dwarf, with a
sugarloaf cap and a scarlet cloak; and the dwarf called to him and said,
‘Prince, whither so fast?’ ‘What is that to thee, you ugly imp?’ said
the prince haughtily, and rode on.

But the dwarf was enraged at his behaviour, and laid a fairy spell
of ill-luck upon him; so that as he rode on the mountain pass became
narrower and narrower, and at last the way was so straitened that he
could not go to step forward: and when he thought to have turned his
horse round and go back the way he came, he heard a loud laugh ringing
round him, and found that the path was closed behind him, so that he was
shut in all round. He next tried to get off his horse and make his way
on foot, but again the laugh rang in his ears, and he found himself
unable to move a step, and thus he was forced to abide spellbound.

Meantime the old king was lingering on in daily hope of his son’s
return, till at last the second son said, ‘Father, I will go in search
of the Water of Life.’ For he thought to himself, ‘My brother is surely
dead, and the kingdom will fall to me if I find the water.’ The king was
at first very unwilling to let him go, but at last yielded to his wish.
So he set out and followed the same road which his brother had done,
and met with the same elf, who stopped him at the same spot in the
mountains, saying, as before, ‘Prince, prince, whither so fast?’ ‘Mind
your own affairs, busybody!’ said the prince scornfully, and rode on.

But the dwarf put the same spell upon him as he put on his elder
brother, and he, too, was at last obliged to take up his abode in the
heart of the mountains. Thus it is with proud silly people, who think
themselves above everyone else, and are too proud to ask or take advice.

When the second prince had thus been gone a long time, the youngest son
said he would go and search for the Water of Life, and trusted he should
soon be able to make his father well again. So he set out, and the dwarf
met him too at the same spot in the valley, among the mountains, and
said, ‘Prince, whither so fast?’ And the prince said, ‘I am going in
search of the Water of Life, because my father is ill, and like to die:
can you help me? Pray be kind, and aid me if you can!’ ‘Do you know
where it is to be found?’ asked the dwarf. ‘No,’ said the prince, ‘I do
not. Pray tell me if you know.’ ‘Then as you have spoken to me kindly,
and are wise enough to seek for advice, I will tell you how and where to
go. The water you seek springs from a well in an enchanted castle; and,
that you may be able to reach it in safety, I will give you an iron wand
and two little loaves of bread; strike the iron door of the castle three
times with the wand, and it will open: two hungry lions will be lying
down inside gaping for their prey, but if you throw them the bread they
will let you pass; then hasten on to the well, and take some of the
Water of Life before the clock strikes twelve; for if you tarry longer
the door will shut upon you for ever.’

Then the prince thanked his little friend with the scarlet cloak for his
friendly aid, and took the wand and the bread, and went travelling on
and on, over sea and over land, till he came to his journey’s end, and
found everything to be as the dwarf had told him. The door flew open at
the third stroke of the wand, and when the lions were quieted he went on
through the castle and came at length to a beautiful hall. Around it he
saw several knights sitting in a trance; then he pulled off their rings
and put them on his own fingers. In another room he saw on a table a
sword and a loaf of bread, which he also took. Further on he came to a
room where a beautiful young lady sat upon a couch; and she welcomed him
joyfully, and said, if he would set her free from the spell that bound
her, the kingdom should be his, if he would come back in a year and
marry her. Then she told him that the well that held the Water of Life
was in the palace gardens; and bade him make haste, and draw what he
wanted before the clock struck twelve.

He walked on; and as he walked through beautiful gardens he came to a
delightful shady spot in which stood a couch; and he thought to himself,
as he felt tired, that he would rest himself for a while, and gaze on
the lovely scenes around him. So he laid himself down, and sleep
fell upon him unawares, so that he did not wake up till the clock was
striking a quarter to twelve. Then he sprang from the couch dreadfully
frightened, ran to the well, filled a cup that was standing by him full
of water, and hastened to get away in time. Just as he was going out of
the iron door it struck twelve, and the door fell so quickly upon him
that it snapped off a piece of his heel.

When he found himself safe, he was overjoyed to think that he had got
the Water of Life; and as he was going on his way homewards, he passed
by the little dwarf, who, when he saw the sword and the loaf, said, ‘You
have made a noble prize; with the sword you can at a blow slay whole
armies, and the bread will never fail you.’ Then the prince thought
to himself, ‘I cannot go home to my father without my brothers’; so he
said, ‘My dear friend, cannot you tell me where my two brothers are, who
set out in search of the Water of Life before me, and never came back?’
‘I have shut them up by a charm between two mountains,’ said the dwarf,
‘because they were proud and ill-behaved, and scorned to ask advice.’
The prince begged so hard for his brothers, that the dwarf at last set
them free, though unwillingly, saying, ‘Beware of them, for they have
bad hearts.’ Their brother, however, was greatly rejoiced to see them,
and told them all that had happened to him; how he had found the Water
of Life, and had taken a cup full of it; and how he had set a beautiful
princess free from a spell that bound her; and how she had engaged to
wait a whole year, and then to marry him, and to give him the kingdom.

Then they all three rode on together, and on their way home came to a
country that was laid waste by war and a dreadful famine, so that it was
feared all must die for want. But the prince gave the king of the land
the bread, and all his kingdom ate of it. And he lent the king the
wonderful sword, and he slew the enemy’s army with it; and thus the
kingdom was once more in peace and plenty. In the same manner he
befriended two other countries through which they passed on their way.

When they came to the sea, they got into a ship and during their voyage
the two eldest said to themselves, ‘Our brother has got the water which
we could not find, therefore our father will forsake us and give him the
kingdom, which is our right’; so they were full of envy and revenge, and
agreed together how they could ruin him. Then they waited till he was
fast asleep, and poured the Water of Life out of the cup, and took it
for themselves, giving him bitter sea-water instead.

When they came to their journey’s end, the youngest son brought his cup
to the sick king, that he might drink and be healed. Scarcely, however,
had he tasted the bitter sea-water when he became worse even than he was
before; and then both the elder sons came in, and blamed the youngest
for what they had done; and said that he wanted to poison their father,
but that they had found the Water of Life, and had brought it with them.
He no sooner began to drink of what they brought him, than he felt his
sickness leave him, and was as strong and well as in his younger days.
Then they went to their brother, and laughed at him, and said, ‘Well,
brother, you found the Water of Life, did you? You have had the trouble
and we shall have the reward. Pray, with all your cleverness, why did
not you manage to keep your eyes open? Next year one of us will take
away your beautiful princess, if you do not take care. You had better
say nothing about this to our father, for he does not believe a word you
say; and if you tell tales, you shall lose your life into the bargain:
but be quiet, and we will let you off.’

The old king was still very angry with his youngest son, and thought
that he really meant to have taken away his life; so he called his court
together, and asked what should be done, and all agreed that he ought to
be put to death. The prince knew nothing of what was going on, till one
day, when the king’s chief huntsmen went a-hunting with him, and they
were alone in the wood together, the huntsman looked so sorrowful that
the prince said, ‘My friend, what is the matter with you?’ ‘I cannot and
dare not tell you,’ said he. But the prince begged very hard, and said,
‘Only tell me what it is, and do not think I shall be angry, for I will
forgive you.’ ‘Alas!’ said the huntsman; ‘the king has ordered me to
shoot you.’ The prince started at this, and said, ‘Let me live, and I
will change dresses with you; you shall take my royal coat to show to my
father, and do you give me your shabby one.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said
the huntsman; ‘I am sure I shall be glad to save you, for I could not
have shot you.’ Then he took the prince’s coat, and gave him the shabby
one, and went away through the wood.

Some time after, three grand embassies came to the old king’s court,
with rich gifts of gold and precious stones for his youngest son; now
all these were sent from the three kings to whom he had lent his sword
and loaf of bread, in order to rid them of their enemy and feed their
people. This touched the old king’s heart, and he thought his son might
still be guiltless, and said to his court, ‘O that my son were still
alive! how it grieves me that I had him killed!’ ‘He is still alive,’
said the huntsman; ‘and I am glad that I had pity on him, but let him
go in peace, and brought home his royal coat.’ At this the king was
overwhelmed with joy, and made it known throughout all his kingdom, that
if his son would come back to his court he would forgive him.

Meanwhile the princess was eagerly waiting till her deliverer should
come back; and had a road made leading up to her palace all of shining
gold; and told her courtiers that whoever came on horseback, and rode
straight up to the gate upon it, was her true lover; and that they must
let him in: but whoever rode on one side of it, they must be sure was
not the right one; and that they must send him away at once.

The time soon came, when the eldest brother thought that he would make
haste to go to the princess, and say that he was the one who had set
her free, and that he should have her for his wife, and the kingdom with
her. As he came before the palace and saw the golden road, he stopped to
look at it, and he thought to himself, ‘It is a pity to ride upon this
beautiful road’; so he turned aside and rode on the right-hand side of
it. But when he came to the gate, the guards, who had seen the road
he took, said to him, he could not be what he said he was, and must go
about his business.

The second prince set out soon afterwards on the same errand; and when
he came to the golden road, and his horse had set one foot upon it,
he stopped to look at it, and thought it very beautiful, and said to
himself, ‘What a pity it is that anything should tread here!’ Then he
too turned aside and rode on the left side of it. But when he came to
the gate the guards said he was not the true prince, and that he too
must go away about his business; and away he went.

Now when the full year was come round, the third brother left the forest
in which he had lain hid for fear of his father’s anger, and set out in
search of his betrothed bride. So he journeyed on, thinking of her all
the way, and rode so quickly that he did not even see what the road was
made of, but went with his horse straight over it; and as he came to the
gate it flew open, and the princess welcomed him with joy, and said
he was her deliverer, and should now be her husband and lord of the
kingdom. When the first joy at their meeting was over, the princess told
him she had heard of his father having forgiven him, and of his wish to
have him home again: so, before his wedding with the princess, he went
to visit his father, taking her with him. Then he told him everything;
how his brothers had cheated and robbed him, and yet that he had borne
all those wrongs for the love of his father. And the old king was very
angry, and wanted to punish his wicked sons; but they made their escape,
and got into a ship and sailed away over the wide sea, and where they
went to nobody knew and nobody cared.

And now the old king gathered together his court, and asked all his
kingdom to come and celebrate the wedding of his son and the princess.
And young and old, noble and squire, gentle and simple, came at once
on the summons; and among the rest came the friendly dwarf, with the
sugarloaf hat, and a new scarlet cloak.

  And the wedding was held, and the merry bells run.
  And all the good people they danced and they sung,
  And feasted and frolick’d I can’t tell how long.




THE TWELVE HUNTSMEN

There was once a king’s son who had a bride whom he loved very much. And
when he was sitting beside her and very happy, news came that his father
lay sick unto death, and desired to see him once again before his end.
Then he said to his beloved: ‘I must now go and leave you, I give you
a ring as a remembrance of me. When I am king, I will return and fetch
you.’ So he rode away, and when he reached his father, the latter was
dangerously ill, and near his death. He said to him: ‘Dear son, I wished
to see you once again before my end, promise me to marry as I wish,’ and
he named a certain king’s daughter who was to be his wife. The son was
in such trouble that he did not think what he was doing, and said: ‘Yes,
dear father, your will shall be done,’ and thereupon the king shut his
eyes, and died.

When therefore the son had been proclaimed king, and the time of
mourning was over, he was forced to keep the promise which he had given
his father, and caused the king’s daughter to be asked in marriage, and
she was promised to him. His first betrothed heard of this, and fretted
so much about his faithfulness that she nearly died. Then her father
said to her: ‘Dearest child, why are you so sad? You shall have
whatsoever you will.’ She thought for a moment and said: ‘Dear father,
I wish for eleven girls exactly like myself in face, figure, and size.’
The father said: ‘If it be possible, your desire shall be fulfilled,’
and he caused a search to be made in his whole kingdom, until eleven
young maidens were found who exactly resembled his daughter in face,
figure, and size.

When they came to the king’s daughter, she had twelve suits of
huntsmen’s clothes made, all alike, and the eleven maidens had to put
on the huntsmen’s clothes, and she herself put on the twelfth suit.
Thereupon she took her leave of her father, and rode away with them,
and rode to the court of her former betrothed, whom she loved so dearly.
Then she asked if he required any huntsmen, and if he would take all of
them into his service. The king looked at her and did not know her, but
as they were such handsome fellows, he said: ‘Yes,’ and that he would
willingly take them, and now they were the king’s twelve huntsmen.

The king, however, had a lion which was a wondrous animal, for he knew
all concealed and secret things. It came to pass that one evening he
said to the king: ‘You think you have twelve huntsmen?’ ‘Yes,’ said the
king, ‘they are twelve huntsmen.’ The lion continued: ‘You are mistaken,
they are twelve girls.’ The king said: ‘That cannot be true! How
will you prove that to me?’ ‘Oh, just let some peas be strewn in the
ante-chamber,’ answered the lion, ‘and then you will soon see. Men have
a firm step, and when they walk over peas none of them stir, but girls
trip and skip, and drag their feet, and the peas roll about.’ The king
was well pleased with the counsel, and caused the peas to be strewn.

There was, however, a servant of the king’s who favoured the huntsmen,
and when he heard that they were going to be put to this test he went to
them and repeated everything, and said: ‘The lion wants to make the king
believe that you are girls.’ Then the king’s daughter thanked him, and
said to her maidens: ‘Show some strength, and step firmly on the peas.’
So next morning when the king had the twelve huntsmen called before
him, and they came into the ante-chamber where the peas were lying, they
stepped so firmly on them, and had such a strong, sure walk, that not
one of the peas either rolled or stirred. Then they went away again,
and the king said to the lion: ‘You have lied to me, they walk just like
men.’ The lion said: ‘They have been informed that they were going to
be put to the test, and have assumed some strength. Just let twelve
spinning-wheels be brought into the ante-chamber, and they will go to
them and be pleased with them, and that is what no man would do.’
The king liked the advice, and had the spinning-wheels placed in the
ante-chamber.

But the servant, who was well disposed to the huntsmen, went to them,
and disclosed the project. So when they were alone the king’s daughter
said to her eleven girls: ‘Show some constraint, and do not look round
at the spinning-wheels.’ And next morning when the king had his twelve
huntsmen summoned, they went through the ante-chamber, and never once
looked at the spinning-wheels. Then the king again said to the lion:
‘You have deceived me, they are men, for they have not looked at the
spinning-wheels.’ The lion replied: ‘They have restrained themselves.’
The king, however, would no longer believe the lion.

The twelve huntsmen always followed the king to the chase, and his
liking for them continually increased. Now it came to pass that
once when they were out hunting, news came that the king’s bride was
approaching. When the true bride heard that, it hurt her so much that
her heart was almost broken, and she fell fainting to the ground. The
king thought something had happened to his dear huntsman, ran up to him,
wanted to help him, and drew his glove off. Then he saw the ring which
he had given to his first bride, and when he looked in her face he
recognized her. Then his heart was so touched that he kissed her, and
when she opened her eyes he said: ‘You are mine, and I am yours, and
no one in the world can alter that.’ He sent a messenger to the other
bride, and entreated her to return to her own kingdom, for he had a wife
already, and someone who had just found an old key did not require a new
one. Thereupon the wedding was celebrated, and the lion was again taken
into favour, because, after all, he had told the truth.




THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN

There was once a merchant who had only one child, a son, that was very
young, and barely able to run alone. He had two richly laden ships then
making a voyage upon the seas, in which he had embarked all his wealth,
in the hope of making great gains, when the news came that both were
lost. Thus from being a rich man he became all at once so very poor that
nothing was left to him but one small plot of land; and there he often
went in an evening to take his walk, and ease his mind of a little of
his trouble.

One day, as he was roaming along in a brown study, thinking with no
great comfort on what he had been and what he now was, and was like
to be, all on a sudden there stood before him a little, rough-looking,
black dwarf. ‘Prithee, friend, why so sorrowful?’ said he to the
merchant; ‘what is it you take so deeply to heart?’ ‘If you would do me
any good I would willingly tell you,’ said the merchant. ‘Who knows but
I may?’ said the little man: ‘tell me what ails you, and perhaps you
will find I may be of some use.’ Then the merchant told him how all his
wealth was gone to the bottom of the sea, and how he had nothing left
but that little plot of land. ‘Oh, trouble not yourself about that,’
said the dwarf; ‘only undertake to bring me here, twelve years hence,
whatever meets you first on your going home, and I will give you as much
as you please.’ The merchant thought this was no great thing to ask;
that it would most likely be his dog or his cat, or something of that
sort, but forgot his little boy Heinel; so he agreed to the bargain, and
signed and sealed the bond to do what was asked of him.

But as he drew near home, his little boy was so glad to see him that he
crept behind him, and laid fast hold of his legs, and looked up in
his face and laughed. Then the father started, trembling with fear and
horror, and saw what it was that he had bound himself to do; but as no
gold was come, he made himself easy by thinking that it was only a joke
that the dwarf was playing him, and that, at any rate, when the money
came, he should see the bearer, and would not take it in.

About a month afterwards he went upstairs into a lumber-room to look
for some old iron, that he might sell it and raise a little money; and
there, instead of his iron, he saw a large pile of gold lying on the
floor. At the sight of this he was overjoyed, and forgetting all about
his son, went into trade again, and became a richer merchant than
before.

Meantime little Heinel grew up, and as the end of the twelve years drew
near the merchant began to call to mind his bond, and became very sad
and thoughtful; so that care and sorrow were written upon his face. The
boy one day asked what was the matter, but his father would not tell for
some time; at last, however, he said that he had, without knowing it,
sold him for gold to a little, ugly-looking, black dwarf, and that the
twelve years were coming round when he must keep his word. Then Heinel
said, ‘Father, give yourself very little trouble about that; I shall be
too much for the little man.’

When the time came, the father and son went out together to the place
agreed upon: and the son drew a circle on the ground, and set himself
and his father in the middle of it. The little black dwarf soon came,
and walked round and round about the circle, but could not find any way
to get into it, and he either could not, or dared not, jump over it. At
last the boy said to him. ‘Have you anything to say to us, my friend, or
what do you want?’ Now Heinel had found a friend in a good fairy, that
was fond of him, and had told him what to do; for this fairy knew what
good luck was in store for him. ‘Have you brought me what you said you
would?’ said the dwarf to the merchant. The old man held his tongue, but
Heinel said again, ‘What do you want here?’ The dwarf said, ‘I come to
talk with your father, not with you.’ ‘You have cheated and taken in my
father,’ said the son; ‘pray give him up his bond at once.’ ‘Fair and
softly,’ said the little old man; ‘right is right; I have paid my money,
and your father has had it, and spent it; so be so good as to let me
have what I paid it for.’ ‘You must have my consent to that first,’ said
Heinel, ‘so please to step in here, and let us talk it over.’ The old
man grinned, and showed his teeth, as if he should have been very glad
to get into the circle if he could. Then at last, after a long talk,
they came to terms. Heinel agreed that his father must give him up, and
that so far the dwarf should have his way: but, on the other hand, the
fairy had told Heinel what fortune was in store for him, if he followed
his own course; and he did not choose to be given up to his hump-backed
friend, who seemed so anxious for his company.

So, to make a sort of drawn battle of the matter, it was settled that
Heinel should be put into an open boat, that lay on the sea-shore hard
by; that the father should push him off with his own hand, and that he
should thus be set adrift, and left to the bad or good luck of wind and
weather. Then he took leave of his father, and set himself in the boat,
but before it got far off a wave struck it, and it fell with one side
low in the water, so the merchant thought that poor Heinel was lost, and
went home very sorrowful, while the dwarf went his way, thinking that at
any rate he had had his revenge.

The boat, however, did not sink, for the good fairy took care of her
friend, and soon raised the boat up again, and it went safely on. The
young man sat safe within, till at length it ran ashore upon an unknown
land. As he jumped upon the shore he saw before him a beautiful castle
but empty and dreary within, for it was enchanted. ‘Here,’ said he to
himself, ‘must I find the prize the good fairy told me of.’ So he once
more searched the whole palace through, till at last he found a white
snake, lying coiled up on a cushion in one of the chambers.

Now the white snake was an enchanted princess; and she was very glad
to see him, and said, ‘Are you at last come to set me free? Twelve
long years have I waited here for the fairy to bring you hither as she
promised, for you alone can save me. This night twelve men will come:
their faces will be black, and they will be dressed in chain armour.
They will ask what you do here, but give no answer; and let them do
what they will--beat, whip, pinch, prick, or torment you--bear all; only
speak not a word, and at twelve o’clock they must go away. The second
night twelve others will come: and the third night twenty-four, who
will even cut off your head; but at the twelfth hour of that night their
power is gone, and I shall be free, and will come and bring you the
Water of Life, and will wash you with it, and bring you back to life
and health.’ And all came to pass as she had said; Heinel bore all, and
spoke not a word; and the third night the princess came, and fell on his
neck and kissed him. Joy and gladness burst forth throughout the castle,
the wedding was celebrated, and he was crowned king of the Golden
Mountain.

They lived together very happily, and the queen had a son. And thus
eight years had passed over their heads, when the king thought of his
father; and he began to long to see him once again. But the queen was
against his going, and said, ‘I know well that misfortunes will come
upon us if you go.’ However, he gave her no rest till she agreed. At his
going away she gave him a wishing-ring, and said, ‘Take this ring, and
put it on your finger; whatever you wish it will bring you; only promise
never to make use of it to bring me hence to your father’s house.’ Then
he said he would do what she asked, and put the ring on his finger, and
wished himself near the town where his father lived.

Heinel found himself at the gates in a moment; but the guards would
not let him go in, because he was so strangely clad. So he went up to a
neighbouring hill, where a shepherd dwelt, and borrowed his old frock,
and thus passed unknown into the town. When he came to his father’s
house, he said he was his son; but the merchant would not believe him,
and said he had had but one son, his poor Heinel, who he knew was long
since dead: and as he was only dressed like a poor shepherd, he would
not even give him anything to eat. The king, however, still vowed that
he was his son, and said, ‘Is there no mark by which you would know me
if I am really your son?’ ‘Yes,’ said his mother, ‘our Heinel had a mark
like a raspberry on his right arm.’ Then he showed them the mark, and
they knew that what he had said was true.

He next told them how he was king of the Golden Mountain, and was
married to a princess, and had a son seven years old. But the merchant
said, ‘that can never be true; he must be a fine king truly who travels
about in a shepherd’s frock!’ At this the son was vexed; and forgetting
his word, turned his ring, and wished for his queen and son. In an
instant they stood before him; but the queen wept, and said he had
broken his word, and bad luck would follow. He did all he could to
soothe her, and she at last seemed to be appeased; but she was not so in
truth, and was only thinking how she should punish him.

One day he took her to walk with him out of the town, and showed her
the spot where the boat was set adrift upon the wide waters. Then he sat
himself down, and said, ‘I am very much tired; sit by me, I will rest my
head in your lap, and sleep a while.’ As soon as he had fallen asleep,
however, she drew the ring from his finger, and crept softly away, and
wished herself and her son at home in their kingdom. And when he awoke
he found himself alone, and saw that the ring was gone from his finger.
‘I can never go back to my father’s house,’ said he; ‘they would say I
am a sorcerer: I will journey forth into the world, till I come again to
my kingdom.’

So saying he set out and travelled till he came to a hill, where three
giants were sharing their father’s goods; and as they saw him pass they
cried out and said, ‘Little men have sharp wits; he shall part the goods
between us.’ Now there was a sword that cut off an enemy’s head whenever
the wearer gave the words, ‘Heads off!’; a cloak that made the owner
invisible, or gave him any form he pleased; and a pair of boots that
carried the wearer wherever he wished. Heinel said they must first let
him try these wonderful things, then he might know how to set a value
upon them. Then they gave him the cloak, and he wished himself a fly,
and in a moment he was a fly. ‘The cloak is very well,’ said he: ‘now
give me the sword.’ ‘No,’ said they; ‘not unless you undertake not to
say, “Heads off!” for if you do we are all dead men.’ So they gave it
him, charging him to try it on a tree. He next asked for the boots also;
and the moment he had all three in his power, he wished himself at
the Golden Mountain; and there he was at once. So the giants were left
behind with no goods to share or quarrel about.

As Heinel came near his castle he heard the sound of merry music; and
the people around told him that his queen was about to marry another
husband. Then he threw his cloak around him, and passed through the
castle hall, and placed himself by the side of the queen, where no one
saw him. But when anything to eat was put upon her plate, he took it
away and ate it himself; and when a glass of wine was handed to her, he
took it and drank it; and thus, though they kept on giving her meat and
drink, her plate and cup were always empty.

Upon this, fear and remorse came over her, and she went into her chamber
alone, and sat there weeping; and he followed her there. ‘Alas!’ said
she to herself, ‘was I not once set free? Why then does this enchantment
still seem to bind me?’

‘False and fickle one!’ said he. ‘One indeed came who set thee free, and
he is now near thee again; but how have you used him? Ought he to
have had such treatment from thee?’ Then he went out and sent away the
company, and said the wedding was at an end, for that he was come back
to the kingdom. But the princes, peers, and great men mocked at him.
However, he would enter into no parley with them, but only asked them
if they would go in peace or not. Then they turned upon him and tried
to seize him; but he drew his sword. ‘Heads Off!’ cried he; and with the
word the traitors’ heads fell before him, and Heinel was once more king
of the Golden Mountain.




DOCTOR KNOWALL

There was once upon a time a poor peasant called Crabb, who drove with
two oxen a load of wood to the town, and sold it to a doctor for two
talers. When the money was being counted out to him, it so happened that
the doctor was sitting at table, and when the peasant saw how well he
ate and drank, his heart desired what he saw, and would willingly
have been a doctor too. So he remained standing a while, and at length
inquired if he too could not be a doctor. ‘Oh, yes,’ said the doctor,
‘that is soon managed.’ ‘What must I do?’ asked the peasant. ‘In the
first place buy yourself an A B C book of the kind which has a cock on
the frontispiece; in the second, turn your cart and your two oxen into
money, and get yourself some clothes, and whatsoever else pertains to
medicine; thirdly, have a sign painted for yourself with the words: “I
am Doctor Knowall,” and have that nailed up above your house-door.’ The
peasant did everything that he had been told to do. When he had doctored
people awhile, but not long, a rich and great lord had some money
stolen. Then he was told about Doctor Knowall who lived in such and such
a village, and must know what had become of the money. So the lord had
the horses harnessed to his carriage, drove out to the village, and
asked Crabb if he were Doctor Knowall. Yes, he was, he said. Then he was
to go with him and bring back the stolen money. ‘Oh, yes, but Grete, my
wife, must go too.’ The lord was willing, and let both of them have a
seat in the carriage, and they all drove away together. When they came
to the nobleman’s castle, the table was spread, and Crabb was told to
sit down and eat. ‘Yes, but my wife, Grete, too,’ said he, and he seated
himself with her at the table. And when the first servant came with a
dish of delicate fare, the peasant nudged his wife, and said: ‘Grete,
that was the first,’ meaning that was the servant who brought the first
dish. The servant, however, thought he intended by that to say: ‘That is
the first thief,’ and as he actually was so, he was terrified, and said
to his comrade outside: ‘The doctor knows all: we shall fare ill, he
said I was the first.’ The second did not want to go in at all, but was
forced. So when he went in with his dish, the peasant nudged his wife,
and said: ‘Grete, that is the second.’ This servant was equally alarmed,
and he got out as fast as he could. The third fared no better, for the
peasant again said: ‘Grete, that is the third.’ The fourth had to carry
in a dish that was covered, and the lord told the doctor that he was to
show his skill, and guess what was beneath the cover. Actually, there
were crabs. The doctor looked at the dish, had no idea what to say, and
cried: ‘Ah, poor Crabb.’ When the lord heard that, he cried: ‘There! he
knows it; he must also know who has the money!’

On this the servants looked terribly uneasy, and made a sign to the
doctor that they wished him to step outside for a moment. When therefore
he went out, all four of them confessed to him that they had stolen
the money, and said that they would willingly restore it and give him a
heavy sum into the bargain, if he would not denounce them, for if he
did they would be hanged. They led him to the spot where the money was
concealed. With this the doctor was satisfied, and returned to the hall,
sat down to the table, and said: ‘My lord, now will I search in my book
where the gold is hidden.’ The fifth servant, however, crept into the
stove to hear if the doctor knew still more. But the doctor sat still
and opened his A B C book, turned the pages backwards and forwards, and
looked for the cock. As he could not find it immediately he said: ‘I
know you are there, so you had better come out!’ Then the fellow in the
stove thought that the doctor meant him, and full of terror, sprang out,
crying: ‘That man knows everything!’ Then Doctor Knowall showed the lord
where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it, and received
from both sides much money in reward, and became a renowned man.




THE SEVEN RAVENS

There was once a man who had seven sons, and last of all one daughter.
Although the little girl was very pretty, she was so weak and small that
they thought she could not live; but they said she should at once be
christened.

So the father sent one of his sons in haste to the spring to get some
water, but the other six ran with him. Each wanted to be first at
drawing the water, and so they were in such a hurry that all let their
pitchers fall into the well, and they stood very foolishly looking at
one another, and did not know what to do, for none dared go home. In the
meantime the father was uneasy, and could not tell what made the
young men stay so long. ‘Surely,’ said he, ‘the whole seven must have
forgotten themselves over some game of play’; and when he had waited
still longer and they yet did not come, he flew into a rage and wished
them all turned into ravens. Scarcely had he spoken these words when he
heard a croaking over his head, and looked up and saw seven ravens as
black as coal flying round and round. Sorry as he was to see his wish
so fulfilled, he did not know how what was done could be undone, and
comforted himself as well as he could for the loss of his seven sons
with his dear little daughter, who soon became stronger and every day
more beautiful.

For a long time she did not know that she had ever had any brothers; for
her father and mother took care not to speak of them before her: but one
day by chance she heard the people about her speak of them. ‘Yes,’ said
they, ‘she is beautiful indeed, but still ‘tis a pity that her brothers
should have been lost for her sake.’ Then she was much grieved, and went
to her father and mother, and asked if she had any brothers, and what
had become of them. So they dared no longer hide the truth from her, but
said it was the will of Heaven, and that her birth was only the innocent
cause of it; but the little girl mourned sadly about it every day, and
thought herself bound to do all she could to bring her brothers back;
and she had neither rest nor ease, till at length one day she stole
away, and set out into the wide world to find her brothers, wherever
they might be, and free them, whatever it might cost her.

She took nothing with her but a little ring which her father and mother
had given her, a loaf of bread in case she should be hungry, a little
pitcher of water in case she should be thirsty, and a little stool
to rest upon when she should be weary. Thus she went on and on, and
journeyed till she came to the world’s end; then she came to the sun,
but the sun looked much too hot and fiery; so she ran away quickly to
the moon, but the moon was cold and chilly, and said, ‘I smell flesh
and blood this way!’ so she took herself away in a hurry and came to the
stars, and the stars were friendly and kind to her, and each star sat
upon his own little stool; but the morning star rose up and gave her a
little piece of wood, and said, ‘If you have not this little piece of
wood, you cannot unlock the castle that stands on the glass-mountain,
and there your brothers live.’ The little girl took the piece of wood,
rolled it up in a little cloth, and went on again until she came to the
glass-mountain, and found the door shut. Then she felt for the little
piece of wood; but when she unwrapped the cloth it was not there, and
she saw she had lost the gift of the good stars. What was to be done?
She wanted to save her brothers, and had no key of the castle of the
glass-mountain; so this faithful little sister took a knife out of her
pocket and cut off her little finger, that was just the size of the
piece of wood she had lost, and put it in the door and opened it.

As she went in, a little dwarf came up to her, and said, ‘What are you
seeking for?’ ‘I seek for my brothers, the seven ravens,’ answered she.
Then the dwarf said, ‘My masters are not at home; but if you will wait
till they come, pray step in.’ Now the little dwarf was getting their
dinner ready, and he brought their food upon seven little plates, and
their drink in seven little glasses, and set them upon the table, and
out of each little plate their sister ate a small piece, and out of each
little glass she drank a small drop; but she let the ring that she had
brought with her fall into the last glass.

On a sudden she heard a fluttering and croaking in the air, and the
dwarf said, ‘Here come my masters.’ When they came in, they wanted to
eat and drink, and looked for their little plates and glasses. Then said
one after the other,

‘Who has eaten from my little plate? And who has been drinking out of my
little glass?’

 ‘Caw! Caw! well I ween
  Mortal lips have this way been.’

When the seventh came to the bottom of his glass, and found there the
ring, he looked at it, and knew that it was his father’s and mother’s,
and said, ‘O that our little sister would but come! then we should be
free.’ When the little girl heard this (for she stood behind the door
all the time and listened), she ran forward, and in an instant all
the ravens took their right form again; and all hugged and kissed each
other, and went merrily home.




THE WEDDING OF MRS FOX


FIRST STORY

There was once upon a time an old fox with nine tails, who believed that
his wife was not faithful to him, and wished to put her to the test. He
stretched himself out under the bench, did not move a limb, and behaved
as if he were stone dead. Mrs Fox went up to her room, shut herself in,
and her maid, Miss Cat, sat by the fire, and did the cooking. When it
became known that the old fox was dead, suitors presented themselves.
The maid heard someone standing at the house-door, knocking. She went
and opened it, and it was a young fox, who said:

 ‘What may you be about, Miss Cat?
  Do you sleep or do you wake?’

She answered:

 ‘I am not sleeping, I am waking,
  Would you know what I am making?
  I am boiling warm beer with butter,
  Will you be my guest for supper?’

‘No, thank you, miss,’ said the fox, ‘what is Mrs Fox doing?’ The maid
replied:

 ‘She is sitting in her room,
  Moaning in her gloom,
  Weeping her little eyes quite red,
  Because old Mr Fox is dead.’

‘Do just tell her, miss, that a young fox is here, who would like to woo
her.’ ‘Certainly, young sir.’

  The cat goes up the stairs trip, trap,
  The door she knocks at tap, tap, tap,
 ‘Mistress Fox, are you inside?’
 ‘Oh, yes, my little cat,’ she cried.
 ‘A wooer he stands at the door out there.’
 ‘What does he look like, my dear?’

‘Has he nine as beautiful tails as the late Mr Fox?’ ‘Oh, no,’ answered
the cat, ‘he has only one.’ ‘Then I will not have him.’

Miss Cat went downstairs and sent the wooer away. Soon afterwards there
was another knock, and another fox was at the door who wished to woo Mrs
Fox. He had two tails, but he did not fare better than the first. After
this still more came, each with one tail more than the other, but they
were all turned away, until at last one came who had nine tails, like
old Mr Fox. When the widow heard that, she said joyfully to the cat:

 ‘Now open the gates and doors all wide,
  And carry old Mr Fox outside.’

But just as the wedding was going to be solemnized, old Mr Fox stirred
under the bench, and cudgelled all the rabble, and drove them and Mrs
Fox out of the house.


SECOND STORY

When old Mr Fox was dead, the wolf came as a suitor, and knocked at the
door, and the cat who was servant to Mrs Fox, opened it for him. The
wolf greeted her, and said:

 ‘Good day, Mrs Cat of Kehrewit,
  How comes it that alone you sit?
  What are you making good?’

The cat replied:

 ‘In milk I’m breaking bread so sweet,
  Will you be my guest, and eat?’

‘No, thank you, Mrs Cat,’ answered the wolf. ‘Is Mrs Fox not at home?’

The cat said:

 ‘She sits upstairs in her room,
  Bewailing her sorrowful doom,
  Bewailing her trouble so sore,
  For old Mr Fox is no more.’

The wolf answered:

 ‘If she’s in want of a husband now,
  Then will it please her to step below?’
  The cat runs quickly up the stair,
  And lets her tail fly here and there,
  Until she comes to the parlour door.
  With her five gold rings at the door she knocks:
 ‘Are you within, good Mistress Fox?
  If you’re in want of a husband now,
  Then will it please you to step below?

Mrs Fox asked: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has he a pointed
mouth?’ ‘No,’ answered the cat. ‘Then he won’t do for me.’

When the wolf was gone, came a dog, a stag, a hare, a bear, a lion, and
all the beasts of the forest, one after the other. But one of the good
qualities which old Mr Fox had possessed, was always lacking, and the
cat had continually to send the suitors away. At length came a young
fox. Then Mrs Fox said: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has a
little pointed mouth?’ ‘Yes,’ said the cat, ‘he has.’ ‘Then let him come
upstairs,’ said Mrs Fox, and ordered the servant to prepare the wedding
feast.

 ‘Sweep me the room as clean as you can,
  Up with the window, fling out my old man!
  For many a fine fat mouse he brought,
  Yet of his wife he never thought,
  But ate up every one he caught.’

Then the wedding was solemnized with young Mr Fox, and there was much
rejoicing and dancing; and if they have not left off, they are dancing
still.




THE SALAD

As a merry young huntsman was once going briskly along through a wood,
there came up a little old woman, and said to him, ‘Good day, good day;
you seem merry enough, but I am hungry and thirsty; do pray give me
something to eat.’ The huntsman took pity on her, and put his hand in
his pocket and gave her what he had. Then he wanted to go his way; but
she took hold of him, and said, ‘Listen, my friend, to what I am going
to tell you; I will reward you for your kindness; go your way, and after
a little time you will come to a tree where you will see nine birds
sitting on a cloak. Shoot into the midst of them, and one will fall down
dead: the cloak will fall too; take it, it is a wishing-cloak, and when
you wear it you will find yourself at any place where you may wish to
be. Cut open the dead bird, take out its heart and keep it, and you will
find a piece of gold under your pillow every morning when you rise. It
is the bird’s heart that will bring you this good luck.’

The huntsman thanked her, and thought to himself, ‘If all this does
happen, it will be a fine thing for me.’ When he had gone a hundred
steps or so, he heard a screaming and chirping in the branches over him,
and looked up and saw a flock of birds pulling a cloak with their bills
and feet; screaming, fighting, and tugging at each other as if
each wished to have it himself. ‘Well,’ said the huntsman, ‘this is
wonderful; this happens just as the old woman said’; then he shot into
the midst of them so that their feathers flew all about. Off went the
flock chattering away; but one fell down dead, and the cloak with it.
Then the huntsman did as the old woman told him, cut open the bird, took
out the heart, and carried the cloak home with him.

The next morning when he awoke he lifted up his pillow, and there lay
the piece of gold glittering underneath; the same happened next day, and
indeed every day when he arose. He heaped up a great deal of gold, and
at last thought to himself, ‘Of what use is this gold to me whilst I am
at home? I will go out into the world and look about me.’

Then he took leave of his friends, and hung his bag and bow about his
neck, and went his way. It so happened that his road one day led through
a thick wood, at the end of which was a large castle in a green meadow,
and at one of the windows stood an old woman with a very beautiful young
lady by her side looking about them. Now the old woman was a witch, and
said to the young lady, ‘There is a young man coming out of the wood who
carries a wonderful prize; we must get it away from him, my dear child,
for it is more fit for us than for him. He has a bird’s heart that
brings a piece of gold under his pillow every morning.’ Meantime the
huntsman came nearer and looked at the lady, and said to himself, ‘I
have been travelling so long that I should like to go into this castle
and rest myself, for I have money enough to pay for anything I want’;
but the real reason was, that he wanted to see more of the beautiful
lady. Then he went into the house, and was welcomed kindly; and it was
not long before he was so much in love that he thought of nothing else
but looking at the lady’s eyes, and doing everything that she wished.
Then the old woman said, ‘Now is the time for getting the bird’s heart.’
So the lady stole it away, and he never found any more gold under his
pillow, for it lay now under the young lady’s, and the old woman took it
away every morning; but he was so much in love that he never missed his
prize.

‘Well,’ said the old witch, ‘we have got the bird’s heart, but not the
wishing-cloak yet, and that we must also get.’ ‘Let us leave him that,’
said the young lady; ‘he has already lost his wealth.’ Then the witch
was very angry, and said, ‘Such a cloak is a very rare and wonderful
thing, and I must and will have it.’ So she did as the old woman told
her, and set herself at the window, and looked about the country and
seemed very sorrowful; then the huntsman said, ‘What makes you so sad?’
‘Alas! dear sir,’ said she, ‘yonder lies the granite rock where all the
costly diamonds grow, and I want so much to go there, that whenever I
think of it I cannot help being sorrowful, for who can reach it? only
the birds and the flies--man cannot.’ ‘If that’s all your grief,’ said
the huntsman, ‘I’ll take you there with all my heart’; so he drew her under
his cloak, and the moment he wished to be on the granite mountain they
were both there. The diamonds glittered so on all sides that they were
delighted with the sight and picked up the finest. But the old witch
made a deep sleep come upon him, and he said to the young lady, ‘Let us
sit down and rest ourselves a little, I am so tired that I cannot stand
any longer.’ So they sat down, and he laid his head in her lap and
fell asleep; and whilst he was sleeping on she took the cloak from
his shoulders, hung it on her own, picked up the diamonds, and wished
herself home again.

When he awoke and found that his lady had tricked him, and left him
alone on the wild rock, he said, ‘Alas! what roguery there is in the
world!’ and there he sat in great grief and fear, not knowing what to
do. Now this rock belonged to fierce giants who lived upon it; and as
he saw three of them striding about, he thought to himself, ‘I can only
save myself by feigning to be asleep’; so he laid himself down as if he
were in a sound sleep. When the giants came up to him, the first pushed
him with his foot, and said, ‘What worm is this that lies here curled
up?’ ‘Tread upon him and kill him,’ said the second. ‘It’s not worth the
trouble,’ said the third; ‘let him live, he’ll go climbing higher up the
mountain, and some cloud will come rolling and carry him away.’ And they
passed on. But the huntsman had heard all they said; and as soon as they
were gone, he climbed to the top of the mountain, and when he had sat
there a short time a cloud came rolling around him, and caught him in a
whirlwind and bore him along for some time, till it settled in a garden,
and he fell quite gently to the ground amongst the greens and cabbages.

Then he looked around him, and said, ‘I wish I had something to eat, if
not I shall be worse off than before; for here I see neither apples
nor pears, nor any kind of fruits, nothing but vegetables.’ At last he
thought to himself, ‘I can eat salad, it will refresh and strengthen
me.’ So he picked out a fine head and ate of it; but scarcely had he
swallowed two bites when he felt himself quite changed, and saw with
horror that he was turned into an ass. However, he still felt very
hungry, and the salad tasted very nice; so he ate on till he came
to another kind of salad, and scarcely had he tasted it when he felt
another change come over him, and soon saw that he was lucky enough to
have found his old shape again.

Then he laid himself down and slept off a little of his weariness; and
when he awoke the next morning he broke off a head both of the good and
the bad salad, and thought to himself, ‘This will help me to my fortune
again, and enable me to pay off some folks for their treachery.’ So he
went away to try and find the castle of his friends; and after wandering
about a few days he luckily found it. Then he stained his face all over
brown, so that even his mother would not have known him, and went into
the castle and asked for a lodging; ‘I am so tired,’ said he, ‘that I
can go no farther.’ ‘Countryman,’ said the witch, ‘who are you? and what
is your business?’ ‘I am,’ said he, ‘a messenger sent by the king to
find the finest salad that grows under the sun. I have been lucky
enough to find it, and have brought it with me; but the heat of the sun
scorches so that it begins to wither, and I don’t know that I can carry
it farther.’

When the witch and the young lady heard of his beautiful salad, they
longed to taste it, and said, ‘Dear countryman, let us just taste it.’
‘To be sure,’ answered he; ‘I have two heads of it with me, and will
give you one’; so he opened his bag and gave them the bad. Then the
witch herself took it into the kitchen to be dressed; and when it was
ready she could not wait till it was carried up, but took a few leaves
immediately and put them in her mouth, and scarcely were they swallowed
when she lost her own form and ran braying down into the court in the
form of an ass. Now the servant-maid came into the kitchen, and seeing
the salad ready, was going to carry it up; but on the way she too felt a
wish to taste it as the old woman had done, and ate some leaves; so she
also was turned into an ass and ran after the other, letting the dish
with the salad fall on the ground. The messenger sat all this time with
the beautiful young lady, and as nobody came with the salad and she
longed to taste it, she said, ‘I don’t know where the salad can be.’
Then he thought something must have happened, and said, ‘I will go
into the kitchen and see.’ And as he went he saw two asses in the court
running about, and the salad lying on the ground. ‘All right!’ said
he; ‘those two have had their share.’ Then he took up the rest of
the leaves, laid them on the dish and brought them to the young lady,
saying, ‘I bring you the dish myself that you may not wait any longer.’
So she ate of it, and like the others ran off into the court braying
away.

Then the huntsman washed his face and went into the court that they
might know him. ‘Now you shall be paid for your roguery,’ said he; and
tied them all three to a rope and took them along with him till he
came to a mill and knocked at the window. ‘What’s the matter?’ said the
miller. ‘I have three tiresome beasts here,’ said the other; ‘if you
will take them, give them food and room, and treat them as I tell you,
I will pay you whatever you ask.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said the miller;
‘but how shall I treat them?’ Then the huntsman said, ‘Give the old
one stripes three times a day and hay once; give the next (who was
the servant-maid) stripes once a day and hay three times; and give
the youngest (who was the beautiful lady) hay three times a day and
no stripes’: for he could not find it in his heart to have her beaten.
After this he went back to the castle, where he found everything he
wanted.

Some days after, the miller came to him and told him that the old ass
was dead; ‘The other two,’ said he, ‘are alive and eat, but are so
sorrowful that they cannot last long.’ Then the huntsman pitied them,
and told the miller to drive them back to him, and when they came, he
gave them some of the good salad to eat. And the beautiful young lady
fell upon her knees before him, and said, ‘O dearest huntsman! forgive
me all the ill I have done you; my mother forced me to it, it was
against my will, for I always loved you very much. Your wishing-cloak
hangs up in the closet, and as for the bird’s heart, I will give it you
too.’ But he said, ‘Keep it, it will be just the same thing, for I mean
to make you my wife.’ So they were married, and lived together very
happily till they died.




THE STORY OF THE YOUTH WHO WENT FORTH TO LEARN WHAT FEAR WAS

A certain father had two sons, the elder of who was smart and sensible,
and could do everything, but the younger was stupid and could neither
learn nor understand anything, and when people saw him they said:
‘There’s a fellow who will give his father some trouble!’ When anything
had to be done, it was always the elder who was forced to do it; but
if his father bade him fetch anything when it was late, or in the
night-time, and the way led through the churchyard, or any other dismal
place, he answered: ‘Oh, no father, I’ll not go there, it makes me
shudder!’ for he was afraid. Or when stories were told by the fire at
night which made the flesh creep, the listeners sometimes said: ‘Oh,
it makes us shudder!’ The younger sat in a corner and listened with
the rest of them, and could not imagine what they could mean. ‘They are
always saying: “It makes me shudder, it makes me shudder!” It does not
make me shudder,’ thought he. ‘That, too, must be an art of which I
understand nothing!’

Now it came to pass that his father said to him one day: ‘Hearken to me,
you fellow in the corner there, you are growing tall and strong, and you
too must learn something by which you can earn your bread. Look how your
brother works, but you do not even earn your salt.’ ‘Well, father,’ he
replied, ‘I am quite willing to learn something--indeed, if it could but
be managed, I should like to learn how to shudder. I don’t understand
that at all yet.’ The elder brother smiled when he heard that, and
thought to himself: ‘Goodness, what a blockhead that brother of mine is!
He will never be good for anything as long as he lives! He who wants to
be a sickle must bend himself betimes.’

The father sighed, and answered him: ‘You shall soon learn what it is to
shudder, but you will not earn your bread by that.’

Soon after this the sexton came to the house on a visit, and the father
bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son was so backward
in every respect that he knew nothing and learnt nothing. ‘Just think,’
said he, ‘when I asked him how he was going to earn his bread, he
actually wanted to learn to shudder.’ ‘If that be all,’ replied the
sexton, ‘he can learn that with me. Send him to me, and I will soon
polish him.’ The father was glad to do it, for he thought: ‘It will
train the boy a little.’ The sexton therefore took him into his house,
and he had to ring the church bell. After a day or two, the sexton awoke
him at midnight, and bade him arise and go up into the church tower and
ring the bell. ‘You shall soon learn what shuddering is,’ thought he,
and secretly went there before him; and when the boy was at the top of
the tower and turned round, and was just going to take hold of the bell
rope, he saw a white figure standing on the stairs opposite the sounding
hole. ‘Who is there?’ cried he, but the figure made no reply, and did
not move or stir. ‘Give an answer,’ cried the boy, ‘or take yourself
off, you have no business here at night.’

The sexton, however, remained standing motionless that the boy might
think he was a ghost. The boy cried a second time: ‘What do you want
here?--speak if you are an honest fellow, or I will throw you down the
steps!’ The sexton thought: ‘He can’t mean to be as bad as his words,’
uttered no sound and stood as if he were made of stone. Then the boy
called to him for the third time, and as that was also to no purpose,
he ran against him and pushed the ghost down the stairs, so that it fell
down the ten steps and remained lying there in a corner. Thereupon he
rang the bell, went home, and without saying a word went to bed, and
fell asleep. The sexton’s wife waited a long time for her husband, but
he did not come back. At length she became uneasy, and wakened the boy,
and asked: ‘Do you know where my husband is? He climbed up the tower
before you did.’ ‘No, I don’t know,’ replied the boy, ‘but someone was
standing by the sounding hole on the other side of the steps, and as he
would neither give an answer nor go away, I took him for a scoundrel,
and threw him downstairs. Just go there and you will see if it was he.
I should be sorry if it were.’ The woman ran away and found her husband,
who was lying moaning in the corner, and had broken his leg.

She carried him down, and then with loud screams she hastened to the
boy’s father, ‘Your boy,’ cried she, ‘has been the cause of a great
misfortune! He has thrown my husband down the steps so that he broke his
leg. Take the good-for-nothing fellow out of our house.’ The father was
terrified, and ran thither and scolded the boy. ‘What wicked tricks
are these?’ said he. ‘The devil must have put them into your head.’
‘Father,’ he replied, ‘do listen to me. I am quite innocent. He was
standing there by night like one intent on doing evil. I did not know
who it was, and I entreated him three times either to speak or to go
away.’ ‘Ah,’ said the father, ‘I have nothing but unhappiness with you.
Go out of my sight. I will see you no more.’

‘Yes, father, right willingly, wait only until it is day. Then will I
go forth and learn how to shudder, and then I shall, at any rate,
understand one art which will support me.’ ‘Learn what you will,’ spoke
the father, ‘it is all the same to me. Here are fifty talers for you.
Take these and go into the wide world, and tell no one from whence you
come, and who is your father, for I have reason to be ashamed of you.’
‘Yes, father, it shall be as you will. If you desire nothing more than
that, I can easily keep it in mind.’

When the day dawned, therefore, the boy put his fifty talers into his
pocket, and went forth on the great highway, and continually said to
himself: ‘If I could but shudder! If I could but shudder!’ Then a man
approached who heard this conversation which the youth was holding with
himself, and when they had walked a little farther to where they could
see the gallows, the man said to him: ‘Look, there is the tree where
seven men have married the ropemaker’s daughter, and are now learning
how to fly. Sit down beneath it, and wait till night comes, and you will
soon learn how to shudder.’ ‘If that is all that is wanted,’ answered
the youth, ‘it is easily done; but if I learn how to shudder as fast as
that, you shall have my fifty talers. Just come back to me early in the
morning.’ Then the youth went to the gallows, sat down beneath it, and
waited till evening came. And as he was cold, he lighted himself a fire,
but at midnight the wind blew so sharply that in spite of his fire, he
could not get warm. And as the wind knocked the hanged men against each
other, and they moved backwards and forwards, he thought to himself:
‘If you shiver below by the fire, how those up above must freeze and
suffer!’ And as he felt pity for them, he raised the ladder, and climbed
up, unbound one of them after the other, and brought down all seven.
Then he stoked the fire, blew it, and set them all round it to warm
themselves. But they sat there and did not stir, and the fire caught
their clothes. So he said: ‘Take care, or I will hang you up again.’ The
dead men, however, did not hear, but were quite silent, and let their
rags go on burning. At this he grew angry, and said: ‘If you will not
take care, I cannot help you, I will not be burnt with you,’ and he hung
them up again each in his turn. Then he sat down by his fire and fell
asleep, and the next morning the man came to him and wanted to have
the fifty talers, and said: ‘Well do you know how to shudder?’ ‘No,’
answered he, ‘how should I know? Those fellows up there did not open
their mouths, and were so stupid that they let the few old rags which
they had on their bodies get burnt.’ Then the man saw that he would not
get the fifty talers that day, and went away saying: ‘Such a youth has
never come my way before.’

The youth likewise went his way, and once more began to mutter to
himself: ‘Ah, if I could but shudder! Ah, if I could but shudder!’ A
waggoner who was striding behind him heard this and asked: ‘Who are
you?’ ‘I don’t know,’ answered the youth. Then the waggoner asked: ‘From
whence do you come?’ ‘I know not.’ ‘Who is your father?’ ‘That I may
not tell you.’ ‘What is it that you are always muttering between your
teeth?’ ‘Ah,’ replied the youth, ‘I do so wish I could shudder, but
no one can teach me how.’ ‘Enough of your foolish chatter,’ said the
waggoner. ‘Come, go with me, I will see about a place for you.’ The
youth went with the waggoner, and in the evening they arrived at an inn
where they wished to pass the night. Then at the entrance of the parlour
the youth again said quite loudly: ‘If I could but shudder! If I could
but shudder!’ The host who heard this, laughed and said: ‘If that is
your desire, there ought to be a good opportunity for you here.’ ‘Ah,
be silent,’ said the hostess, ‘so many prying persons have already lost
their lives, it would be a pity and a shame if such beautiful eyes as
these should never see the daylight again.’

But the youth said: ‘However difficult it may be, I will learn it. For
this purpose indeed have I journeyed forth.’ He let the host have
no rest, until the latter told him, that not far from thence stood a
haunted castle where anyone could very easily learn what shuddering was,
if he would but watch in it for three nights. The king had promised that
he who would venture should have his daughter to wife, and she was the
most beautiful maiden the sun shone on. Likewise in the castle lay great
treasures, which were guarded by evil spirits, and these treasures would
then be freed, and would make a poor man rich enough. Already many men
had gone into the castle, but as yet none had come out again. Then the
youth went next morning to the king, and said: ‘If it be allowed, I will
willingly watch three nights in the haunted castle.’

The king looked at him, and as the youth pleased him, he said: ‘You may
ask for three things to take into the castle with you, but they must
be things without life.’ Then he answered: ‘Then I ask for a fire, a
turning lathe, and a cutting-board with the knife.’

The king had these things carried into the castle for him during the
day. When night was drawing near, the youth went up and made himself
a bright fire in one of the rooms, placed the cutting-board and knife
beside it, and seated himself by the turning-lathe. ‘Ah, if I could
but shudder!’ said he, ‘but I shall not learn it here either.’ Towards
midnight he was about to poke his fire, and as he was blowing it,
something cried suddenly from one corner: ‘Au, miau! how cold we are!’
‘You fools!’ cried he, ‘what are you crying about? If you are cold, come
and take a seat by the fire and warm yourselves.’ And when he had said
that, two great black cats came with one tremendous leap and sat down
on each side of him, and looked savagely at him with their fiery
eyes. After a short time, when they had warmed themselves, they said:
‘Comrade, shall we have a game of cards?’ ‘Why not?’ he replied, ‘but
just show me your paws.’ Then they stretched out their claws. ‘Oh,’ said
he, ‘what long nails you have! Wait, I must first cut them for you.’
Thereupon he seized them by the throats, put them on the cutting-board
and screwed their feet fast. ‘I have looked at your fingers,’ said he,
‘and my fancy for card-playing has gone,’ and he struck them dead and
threw them out into the water. But when he had made away with these two,
and was about to sit down again by his fire, out from every hole and
corner came black cats and black dogs with red-hot chains, and more
and more of them came until he could no longer move, and they yelled
horribly, and got on his fire, pulled it to pieces, and tried to put
it out. He watched them for a while quietly, but at last when they were
going too far, he seized his cutting-knife, and cried: ‘Away with you,
vermin,’ and began to cut them down. Some of them ran away, the others
he killed, and threw out into the fish-pond. When he came back he fanned
the embers of his fire again and warmed himself. And as he thus sat, his
eyes would keep open no longer, and he felt a desire to sleep. Then he
looked round and saw a great bed in the corner. ‘That is the very thing
for me,’ said he, and got into it. When he was just going to shut his
eyes, however, the bed began to move of its own accord, and went over
the whole of the castle. ‘That’s right,’ said he, ‘but go faster.’ Then
the bed rolled on as if six horses were harnessed to it, up and down,
over thresholds and stairs, but suddenly hop, hop, it turned over upside
down, and lay on him like a mountain. But he threw quilts and pillows up
in the air, got out and said: ‘Now anyone who likes, may drive,’ and
lay down by his fire, and slept till it was day. In the morning the king
came, and when he saw him lying there on the ground, he thought the evil
spirits had killed him and he was dead. Then said he: ‘After all it is a
pity,--for so handsome a man.’ The youth heard it, got up, and said: ‘It
has not come to that yet.’ Then the king was astonished, but very glad,
and asked how he had fared. ‘Very well indeed,’ answered he; ‘one
night is past, the two others will pass likewise.’ Then he went to the
innkeeper, who opened his eyes very wide, and said: ‘I never expected to
see you alive again! Have you learnt how to shudder yet?’ ‘No,’ said he,
‘it is all in vain. If someone would but tell me!’

The second night he again went up into the old castle, sat down by the
fire, and once more began his old song: ‘If I could but shudder!’ When
midnight came, an uproar and noise of tumbling about was heard; at
first it was low, but it grew louder and louder. Then it was quiet for
a while, and at length with a loud scream, half a man came down the
chimney and fell before him. ‘Hullo!’ cried he, ‘another half belongs
to this. This is not enough!’ Then the uproar began again, there was a
roaring and howling, and the other half fell down likewise. ‘Wait,’ said
he, ‘I will just stoke up the fire a little for you.’ When he had done
that and looked round again, the two pieces were joined together, and a
hideous man was sitting in his place. ‘That is no part of our bargain,’
said the youth, ‘the bench is mine.’ The man wanted to push him away;
the youth, however, would not allow that, but thrust him off with all
his strength, and seated himself again in his own place. Then still more
men fell down, one after the other; they brought nine dead men’s legs
and two skulls, and set them up and played at nine-pins with them. The
youth also wanted to play and said: ‘Listen you, can I join you?’ ‘Yes,
if you have any money.’ ‘Money enough,’ replied he, ‘but your balls are
not quite round.’ Then he took the skulls and put them in the lathe and
turned them till they were round. ‘There, now they will roll better!’
said he. ‘Hurrah! now we’ll have fun!’ He played with them and lost some
of his money, but when it struck twelve, everything vanished from his
sight. He lay down and quietly fell asleep. Next morning the king came
to inquire after him. ‘How has it fared with you this time?’ asked he.
‘I have been playing at nine-pins,’ he answered, ‘and have lost a couple
of farthings.’ ‘Have you not shuddered then?’ ‘What?’ said he, ‘I have
had a wonderful time! If I did but know what it was to shudder!’

The third night he sat down again on his bench and said quite sadly:
‘If I could but shudder.’ When it grew late, six tall men came in and
brought a coffin. Then he said: ‘Ha, ha, that is certainly my little
cousin, who died only a few days ago,’ and he beckoned with his finger,
and cried: ‘Come, little cousin, come.’ They placed the coffin on the
ground, but he went to it and took the lid off, and a dead man lay
therein. He felt his face, but it was cold as ice. ‘Wait,’ said he, ‘I
will warm you a little,’ and went to the fire and warmed his hand and
laid it on the dead man’s face, but he remained cold. Then he took him
out, and sat down by the fire and laid him on his breast and rubbed his
arms that the blood might circulate again. As this also did no good, he
thought to himself: ‘When two people lie in bed together, they warm each
other,’ and carried him to the bed, covered him over and lay down by
him. After a short time the dead man became warm too, and began to move.
Then said the youth, ‘See, little cousin, have I not warmed you?’ The
dead man, however, got up and cried: ‘Now will I strangle you.’

‘What!’ said he, ‘is that the way you thank me? You shall at once go
into your coffin again,’ and he took him up, threw him into it, and shut
the lid. Then came the six men and carried him away again. ‘I cannot
manage to shudder,’ said he. ‘I shall never learn it here as long as I
live.’

Then a man entered who was taller than all others, and looked terrible.
He was old, however, and had a long white beard. ‘You wretch,’ cried he,
‘you shall soon learn what it is to shudder, for you shall die.’ ‘Not so
fast,’ replied the youth. ‘If I am to die, I shall have to have a say
in it.’ ‘I will soon seize you,’ said the fiend. ‘Softly, softly, do not
talk so big. I am as strong as you are, and perhaps even stronger.’
‘We shall see,’ said the old man. ‘If you are stronger, I will let you
go--come, we will try.’ Then he led him by dark passages to a smith’s
forge, took an axe, and with one blow struck an anvil into the ground.
‘I can do better than that,’ said the youth, and went to the other
anvil. The old man placed himself near and wanted to look on, and his
white beard hung down. Then the youth seized the axe, split the anvil
with one blow, and in it caught the old man’s beard. ‘Now I have you,’
said the youth. ‘Now it is your turn to die.’ Then he seized an iron bar
and beat the old man till he moaned and entreated him to stop, when he
would give him great riches. The youth drew out the axe and let him go.
The old man led him back into the castle, and in a cellar showed him
three chests full of gold. ‘Of these,’ said he, ‘one part is for the
poor, the other for the king, the third yours.’ In the meantime it
struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, so that the youth stood in
darkness. ‘I shall still be able to find my way out,’ said he, and felt
about, found the way into the room, and slept there by his fire.
Next morning the king came and said: ‘Now you must have learnt what
shuddering is?’ ‘No,’ he answered; ‘what can it be? My dead cousin was
here, and a bearded man came and showed me a great deal of money down
below, but no one told me what it was to shudder.’ ‘Then,’ said the
king, ‘you have saved the castle, and shall marry my daughter.’ ‘That
is all very well,’ said he, ‘but still I do not know what it is to
shudder!’

Then the gold was brought up and the wedding celebrated; but howsoever
much the young king loved his wife, and however happy he was, he still
said always: ‘If I could but shudder--if I could but shudder.’ And this
at last angered her. Her waiting-maid said: ‘I will find a cure for him;
he shall soon learn what it is to shudder.’ She went out to the stream
which flowed through the garden, and had a whole bucketful of gudgeons
brought to her. At night when the young king was sleeping, his wife was
to draw the clothes off him and empty the bucket full of cold water
with the gudgeons in it over him, so that the little fishes would
sprawl about him. Then he woke up and cried: ‘Oh, what makes me shudder
so?--what makes me shudder so, dear wife? Ah! now I know what it is to
shudder!’




KING GRISLY-BEARD

A great king of a land far away in the East had a daughter who was very
beautiful, but so proud, and haughty, and conceited, that none of the
princes who came to ask her in marriage was good enough for her, and she
only made sport of them.

Once upon a time the king held a great feast, and asked thither all
her suitors; and they all sat in a row, ranged according to their
rank--kings, and princes, and dukes, and earls, and counts, and barons,
and knights. Then the princess came in, and as she passed by them she
had something spiteful to say to every one. The first was too fat: ‘He’s
as round as a tub,’ said she. The next was too tall: ‘What a maypole!’
said she. The next was too short: ‘What a dumpling!’ said she. The
fourth was too pale, and she called him ‘Wallface.’ The fifth was too
red, so she called him ‘Coxcomb.’ The sixth was not straight enough;
so she said he was like a green stick, that had been laid to dry over
a baker’s oven. And thus she had some joke to crack upon every one: but
she laughed more than all at a good king who was there. ‘Look at
him,’ said she; ‘his beard is like an old mop; he shall be called
Grisly-beard.’ So the king got the nickname of Grisly-beard.

But the old king was very angry when he saw how his daughter behaved,
and how she ill-treated all his guests; and he vowed that, willing or
unwilling, she should marry the first man, be he prince or beggar, that
came to the door.

Two days after there came by a travelling fiddler, who began to play
under the window and beg alms; and when the king heard him, he said,
‘Let him come in.’ So they brought in a dirty-looking fellow; and when
he had sung before the king and the princess, he begged a boon. Then the
king said, ‘You have sung so well, that I will give you my daughter for
your wife.’ The princess begged and prayed; but the king said, ‘I have
sworn to give you to the first comer, and I will keep my word.’ So words
and tears were of no avail; the parson was sent for, and she was married
to the fiddler. When this was over the king said, ‘Now get ready to
go--you must not stay here--you must travel on with your husband.’

Then the fiddler went his way, and took her with him, and they soon came
to a great wood. ‘Pray,’ said she, ‘whose is this wood?’ ‘It belongs
to King Grisly-beard,’ answered he; ‘hadst thou taken him, all had been
thine.’ ‘Ah! unlucky wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘would that I had
married King Grisly-beard!’ Next they came to some fine meadows. ‘Whose
are these beautiful green meadows?’ said she. ‘They belong to King
Grisly-beard, hadst thou taken him, they had all been thine.’ ‘Ah!
unlucky wretch that I am!’ said she; ‘would that I had married King
Grisly-beard!’

Then they came to a great city. ‘Whose is this noble city?’ said she.
‘It belongs to King Grisly-beard; hadst thou taken him, it had all been
thine.’ ‘Ah! wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘why did I not marry King
Grisly-beard?’ ‘That is no business of mine,’ said the fiddler: ‘why
should you wish for another husband? Am not I good enough for you?’

At last they came to a small cottage. ‘What a paltry place!’ said she;
‘to whom does that little dirty hole belong?’ Then the fiddler said,
‘That is your and my house, where we are to live.’ ‘Where are your
servants?’ cried she. ‘What do we want with servants?’ said he; ‘you
must do for yourself whatever is to be done. Now make the fire, and put
on water and cook my supper, for I am very tired.’ But the princess knew
nothing of making fires and cooking, and the fiddler was forced to help
her. When they had eaten a very scanty meal they went to bed; but the
fiddler called her up very early in the morning to clean the house. Thus
they lived for two days: and when they had eaten up all there was in the
cottage, the man said, ‘Wife, we can’t go on thus, spending money and
earning nothing. You must learn to weave baskets.’ Then he went out and
cut willows, and brought them home, and she began to weave; but it made
her fingers very sore. ‘I see this work won’t do,’ said he: ‘try and
spin; perhaps you will do that better.’ So she sat down and tried to
spin; but the threads cut her tender fingers till the blood ran. ‘See
now,’ said the fiddler, ‘you are good for nothing; you can do no work:
what a bargain I have got! However, I’ll try and set up a trade in pots
and pans, and you shall stand in the market and sell them.’ ‘Alas!’
sighed she, ‘if any of my father’s court should pass by and see me
standing in the market, how they will laugh at me!’

But her husband did not care for that, and said she must work, if she
did not wish to die of hunger. At first the trade went well; for many
people, seeing such a beautiful woman, went to buy her wares, and paid
their money without thinking of taking away the goods. They lived on
this as long as it lasted; and then her husband bought a fresh lot of
ware, and she sat herself down with it in the corner of the market; but
a drunken soldier soon came by, and rode his horse against her stall,
and broke all her goods into a thousand pieces. Then she began to cry,
and knew not what to do. ‘Ah! what will become of me?’ said she; ‘what
will my husband say?’ So she ran home and told him all. ‘Who would
have thought you would have been so silly,’ said he, ‘as to put an
earthenware stall in the corner of the market, where everybody passes?
but let us have no more crying; I see you are not fit for this sort of
work, so I have been to the king’s palace, and asked if they did not
want a kitchen-maid; and they say they will take you, and there you will
have plenty to eat.’

Thus the princess became a kitchen-maid, and helped the cook to do all
the dirtiest work; but she was allowed to carry home some of the meat
that was left, and on this they lived.

She had not been there long before she heard that the king’s eldest son
was passing by, going to be married; and she went to one of the windows
and looked out. Everything was ready, and all the pomp and brightness of
the court was there. Then she bitterly grieved for the pride and folly
which had brought her so low. And the servants gave her some of the rich
meats, which she put into her basket to take home.

All on a sudden, as she was going out, in came the king’s son in golden
clothes; and when he saw a beautiful woman at the door, he took her
by the hand, and said she should be his partner in the dance; but she
trembled for fear, for she saw that it was King Grisly-beard, who was
making sport of her. However, he kept fast hold, and led her in; and the
cover of the basket came off, so that the meats in it fell about. Then
everybody laughed and jeered at her; and she was so abashed, that she
wished herself a thousand feet deep in the earth. She sprang to the
door to run away; but on the steps King Grisly-beard overtook her, and
brought her back and said, ‘Fear me not! I am the fiddler who has lived
with you in the hut. I brought you there because I really loved you. I
am also the soldier that overset your stall. I have done all this only
to cure you of your silly pride, and to show you the folly of your
ill-treatment of me. Now all is over: you have learnt wisdom, and it is
time to hold our marriage feast.’

Then the chamberlains came and brought her the most beautiful robes; and
her father and his whole court were there already, and welcomed her home
on her marriage. Joy was in every face and every heart. The feast was
grand; they danced and sang; all were merry; and I only wish that you
and I had been of the party.




IRON HANS

There was once upon a time a king who had a great forest near his
palace, full of all kinds of wild animals. One day he sent out a
huntsman to shoot him a roe, but he did not come back. ‘Perhaps some
accident has befallen him,’ said the king, and the next day he sent out
two more huntsmen who were to search for him, but they too stayed away.
Then on the third day, he sent for all his huntsmen, and said: ‘Scour
the whole forest through, and do not give up until you have found all
three.’ But of these also, none came home again, none were seen again.
From that time forth, no one would any longer venture into the forest,
and it lay there in deep stillness and solitude, and nothing was seen
of it, but sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over it. This lasted for
many years, when an unknown huntsman announced himself to the king as
seeking a situation, and offered to go into the dangerous forest. The
king, however, would not give his consent, and said: ‘It is not safe in
there; I fear it would fare with you no better than with the others,
and you would never come out again.’ The huntsman replied: ‘Lord, I will
venture it at my own risk, of fear I know nothing.’

The huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest. It was
not long before the dog fell in with some game on the way, and wanted to
pursue it; but hardly had the dog run two steps when it stood before a
deep pool, could go no farther, and a naked arm stretched itself out of
the water, seized it, and drew it under. When the huntsman saw that, he
went back and fetched three men to come with buckets and bale out the
water. When they could see to the bottom there lay a wild man whose body
was brown like rusty iron, and whose hair hung over his face down to his
knees. They bound him with cords, and led him away to the castle. There
was great astonishment over the wild man; the king, however, had him put
in an iron cage in his courtyard, and forbade the door to be opened
on pain of death, and the queen herself was to take the key into her
keeping. And from this time forth everyone could again go into the
forest with safety.

The king had a son of eight years, who was once playing in the
courtyard, and while he was playing, his golden ball fell into the cage.
The boy ran thither and said: ‘Give me my ball out.’ ‘Not till you have
opened the door for me,’ answered the man. ‘No,’ said the boy, ‘I will
not do that; the king has forbidden it,’ and ran away. The next day he
again went and asked for his ball; the wild man said: ‘Open my door,’
but the boy would not. On the third day the king had ridden out hunting,
and the boy went once more and said: ‘I cannot open the door even if I
wished, for I have not the key.’ Then the wild man said: ‘It lies under
your mother’s pillow, you can get it there.’ The boy, who wanted to have
his ball back, cast all thought to the winds, and brought the key. The
door opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his fingers. When it
was open the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball, and hurried
away. The boy had become afraid; he called and cried after him: ‘Oh,
wild man, do not go away, or I shall be beaten!’ The wild man turned
back, took him up, set him on his shoulder, and went with hasty steps
into the forest. When the king came home, he observed the empty cage,
and asked the queen how that had happened. She knew nothing about it,
and sought the key, but it was gone. She called the boy, but no one
answered. The king sent out people to seek for him in the fields, but
they did not find him. Then he could easily guess what had happened, and
much grief reigned in the royal court.

When the wild man had once more reached the dark forest, he took the boy
down from his shoulder, and said to him: ‘You will never see your father
and mother again, but I will keep you with me, for you have set me free,
and I have compassion on you. If you do all I bid you, you shall fare
well. Of treasure and gold have I enough, and more than anyone in the
world.’ He made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept, and the
next morning the man took him to a well, and said: ‘Behold, the gold
well is as bright and clear as crystal, you shall sit beside it, and
take care that nothing falls into it, or it will be polluted. I will
come every evening to see if you have obeyed my order.’ The boy placed
himself by the brink of the well, and often saw a golden fish or a
golden snake show itself therein, and took care that nothing fell in.
As he was thus sitting, his finger hurt him so violently that he
involuntarily put it in the water. He drew it quickly out again, but saw
that it was quite gilded, and whatsoever pains he took to wash the gold
off again, all was to no purpose. In the evening Iron Hans came back,
looked at the boy, and said: ‘What has happened to the well?’ ‘Nothing
nothing,’ he answered, and held his finger behind his back, that the
man might not see it. But he said: ‘You have dipped your finger into
the water, this time it may pass, but take care you do not again let
anything go in.’ By daybreak the boy was already sitting by the well and
watching it. His finger hurt him again and he passed it over his head,
and then unhappily a hair fell down into the well. He took it quickly
out, but it was already quite gilded. Iron Hans came, and already knew
what had happened. ‘You have let a hair fall into the well,’ said he.
‘I will allow you to watch by it once more, but if this happens for the
third time then the well is polluted and you can no longer remain with
me.’

On the third day, the boy sat by the well, and did not stir his finger,
however much it hurt him. But the time was long to him, and he looked at
the reflection of his face on the surface of the water. And as he
still bent down more and more while he was doing so, and trying to look
straight into the eyes, his long hair fell down from his shoulders into
the water. He raised himself up quickly, but the whole of the hair of
his head was already golden and shone like the sun. You can imagine how
terrified the poor boy was! He took his pocket-handkerchief and tied it
round his head, in order that the man might not see it. When he came he
already knew everything, and said: ‘Take the handkerchief off.’ Then the
golden hair streamed forth, and let the boy excuse himself as he might,
it was of no use. ‘You have not stood the trial and can stay here no
longer. Go forth into the world, there you will learn what poverty is.
But as you have not a bad heart, and as I mean well by you, there is
one thing I will grant you; if you fall into any difficulty, come to the
forest and cry: “Iron Hans,” and then I will come and help you. My
power is great, greater than you think, and I have gold and silver in
abundance.’

Then the king’s son left the forest, and walked by beaten and unbeaten
paths ever onwards until at length he reached a great city. There he
looked for work, but could find none, and he learnt nothing by which he
could help himself. At length he went to the palace, and asked if they
would take him in. The people about court did not at all know what use
they could make of him, but they liked him, and told him to stay. At
length the cook took him into his service, and said he might carry wood
and water, and rake the cinders together. Once when it so happened that
no one else was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the food to the
royal table, but as he did not like to let his golden hair be seen, he
kept his little cap on. Such a thing as that had never yet come under
the king’s notice, and he said: ‘When you come to the royal table you
must take your hat off.’ He answered: ‘Ah, Lord, I cannot; I have a bad
sore place on my head.’ Then the king had the cook called before him
and scolded him, and asked how he could take such a boy as that into his
service; and that he was to send him away at once. The cook, however,
had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener’s boy.

And now the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig, and bear
the wind and bad weather. Once in summer when he was working alone in
the garden, the day was so warm he took his little cap off that the air
might cool him. As the sun shone on his hair it glittered and flashed so
that the rays fell into the bedroom of the king’s daughter, and up she
sprang to see what that could be. Then she saw the boy, and cried to
him: ‘Boy, bring me a wreath of flowers.’ He put his cap on with all
haste, and gathered wild field-flowers and bound them together. When he
was ascending the stairs with them, the gardener met him, and said: ‘How
can you take the king’s daughter a garland of such common flowers? Go
quickly, and get another, and seek out the prettiest and rarest.’ ‘Oh,
no,’ replied the boy, ‘the wild ones have more scent, and will please
her better.’ When he got into the room, the king’s daughter said: ‘Take
your cap off, it is not seemly to keep it on in my presence.’ He again
said: ‘I may not, I have a sore head.’ She, however, caught at his
cap and pulled it off, and then his golden hair rolled down on his
shoulders, and it was splendid to behold. He wanted to run out, but she
held him by the arm, and gave him a handful of ducats. With these he
departed, but he cared nothing for the gold pieces. He took them to the
gardener, and said: ‘I present them to your children, they can play with
them.’ The following day the king’s daughter again called to him that he
was to bring her a wreath of field-flowers, and then he went in with it,
she instantly snatched at his cap, and wanted to take it away from him,
but he held it fast with both hands. She again gave him a handful of
ducats, but he would not keep them, and gave them to the gardener for
playthings for his children. On the third day things went just the
same; she could not get his cap away from him, and he would not have her
money.

Not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war. The king gathered
together his people, and did not know whether or not he could offer any
opposition to the enemy, who was superior in strength and had a mighty
army. Then said the gardener’s boy: ‘I am grown up, and will go to the
wars also, only give me a horse.’ The others laughed, and said: ‘Seek
one for yourself when we are gone, we will leave one behind us in the
stable for you.’ When they had gone forth, he went into the stable, and
led the horse out; it was lame of one foot, and limped hobblety jib,
hobblety jib; nevertheless he mounted it, and rode away to the dark
forest. When he came to the outskirts, he called ‘Iron Hans’ three
times so loudly that it echoed through the trees. Thereupon the wild man
appeared immediately, and said: ‘What do you desire?’ ‘I want a strong
steed, for I am going to the wars.’ ‘That you shall have, and still more
than you ask for.’ Then the wild man went back into the forest, and it
was not long before a stable-boy came out of it, who led a horse that
snorted with its nostrils, and could hardly be restrained, and behind
them followed a great troop of warriors entirely equipped in iron, and
their swords flashed in the sun. The youth made over his three-legged
horse to the stable-boy, mounted the other, and rode at the head of the
soldiers. When he got near the battlefield a great part of the king’s
men had already fallen, and little was wanting to make the rest give
way. Then the youth galloped thither with his iron soldiers, broke like
a hurricane over the enemy, and beat down all who opposed him. They
began to flee, but the youth pursued, and never stopped, until there
was not a single man left. Instead of returning to the king, however, he
conducted his troop by byways back to the forest, and called forth Iron
Hans. ‘What do you desire?’ asked the wild man. ‘Take back your horse
and your troops, and give me my three-legged horse again.’ All that he
asked was done, and soon he was riding on his three-legged horse. When
the king returned to his palace, his daughter went to meet him, and
wished him joy of his victory. ‘I am not the one who carried away the
victory,’ said he, ‘but a strange knight who came to my assistance with
his soldiers.’ The daughter wanted to hear who the strange knight was,
but the king did not know, and said: ‘He followed the enemy, and I did
not see him again.’ She inquired of the gardener where his boy was, but
he smiled, and said: ‘He has just come home on his three-legged horse,
and the others have been mocking him, and crying: “Here comes our
hobblety jib back again!” They asked, too: “Under what hedge have you
been lying sleeping all the time?” So he said: “I did the best of all,
and it would have gone badly without me.” And then he was still more
ridiculed.’

The king said to his daughter: ‘I will proclaim a great feast that shall
last for three days, and you shall throw a golden apple. Perhaps the
unknown man will show himself.’ When the feast was announced, the youth
went out to the forest, and called Iron Hans. ‘What do you desire?’
asked he. ‘That I may catch the king’s daughter’s golden apple.’ ‘It is
as safe as if you had it already,’ said Iron Hans. ‘You shall likewise
have a suit of red armour for the occasion, and ride on a spirited
chestnut-horse.’ When the day came, the youth galloped to the spot, took
his place amongst the knights, and was recognized by no one. The king’s
daughter came forward, and threw a golden apple to the knights, but none
of them caught it but he, only as soon as he had it he galloped away.

On the second day Iron Hans equipped him as a white knight, and gave him
a white horse. Again he was the only one who caught the apple, and
he did not linger an instant, but galloped off with it. The king grew
angry, and said: ‘That is not allowed; he must appear before me and tell
his name.’ He gave the order that if the knight who caught the apple,
should go away again they should pursue him, and if he would not come
back willingly, they were to cut him down and stab him.

On the third day, he received from Iron Hans a suit of black armour and
a black horse, and again he caught the apple. But when he was riding off
with it, the king’s attendants pursued him, and one of them got so near
him that he wounded the youth’s leg with the point of his sword. The
youth nevertheless escaped from them, but his horse leapt so violently
that the helmet fell from the youth’s head, and they could see that he
had golden hair. They rode back and announced this to the king.

The following day the king’s daughter asked the gardener about his
boy. ‘He is at work in the garden; the queer creature has been at the
festival too, and only came home yesterday evening; he has likewise
shown my children three golden apples which he has won.’

The king had him summoned into his presence, and he came and again had
his little cap on his head. But the king’s daughter went up to him and
took it off, and then his golden hair fell down over his shoulders, and
he was so handsome that all were amazed. ‘Are you the knight who came
every day to the festival, always in different colours, and who caught
the three golden apples?’ asked the king. ‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘and here
the apples are,’ and he took them out of his pocket, and returned them
to the king. ‘If you desire further proof, you may see the wound which
your people gave me when they followed me. But I am likewise the knight
who helped you to your victory over your enemies.’ ‘If you can perform
such deeds as that, you are no gardener’s boy; tell me, who is your
father?’ ‘My father is a mighty king, and gold have I in plenty as great
as I require.’ ‘I well see,’ said the king, ‘that I owe my thanks to
you; can I do anything to please you?’ ‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘that indeed
you can. Give me your daughter to wife.’ The maiden laughed, and said:
‘He does not stand much on ceremony, but I have already seen by his
golden hair that he was no gardener’s boy,’ and then she went and
kissed him. His father and mother came to the wedding, and were in great
delight, for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear
son again. And as they were sitting at the marriage-feast, the music
suddenly stopped, the doors opened, and a stately king came in with a
great retinue. He went up to the youth, embraced him and said: ‘I am
Iron Hans, and was by enchantment a wild man, but you have set me free;
all the treasures which I possess, shall be your property.’




CAT-SKIN

There was once a king, whose queen had hair of the purest gold, and was
so beautiful that her match was not to be met with on the whole face of
the earth. But this beautiful queen fell ill, and when she felt that her
end drew near she called the king to her and said, ‘Promise me that you
will never marry again, unless you meet with a wife who is as beautiful
as I am, and who has golden hair like mine.’ Then when the king in his
grief promised all she asked, she shut her eyes and died. But the king
was not to be comforted, and for a long time never thought of taking
another wife. At last, however, his wise men said, ‘this will not do;
the king must marry again, that we may have a queen.’ So messengers were
sent far and wide, to seek for a bride as beautiful as the late queen.
But there was no princess in the world so beautiful; and if there had
been, still there was not one to be found who had golden hair. So the
messengers came home, and had had all their trouble for nothing.

Now the king had a daughter, who was just as beautiful as her mother,
and had the same golden hair. And when she was grown up, the king looked
at her and saw that she was just like this late queen: then he said to
his courtiers, ‘May I not marry my daughter? She is the very image of my
dead wife: unless I have her, I shall not find any bride upon the whole
earth, and you say there must be a queen.’ When the courtiers heard this
they were shocked, and said, ‘Heaven forbid that a father should marry
his daughter! Out of so great a sin no good can come.’ And his daughter
was also shocked, but hoped the king would soon give up such thoughts;
so she said to him, ‘Before I marry anyone I must have three dresses:
one must be of gold, like the sun; another must be of shining silver,
like the moon; and a third must be dazzling as the stars: besides this,
I want a mantle of a thousand different kinds of fur put together, to
which every beast in the kingdom must give a part of his skin.’ And thus
she thought he would think of the matter no more. But the king made the
most skilful workmen in his kingdom weave the three dresses: one golden,
like the sun; another silvery, like the moon; and a third sparkling,
like the stars: and his hunters were told to hunt out all the beasts in
his kingdom, and to take the finest fur out of their skins: and thus a
mantle of a thousand furs was made.

When all were ready, the king sent them to her; but she got up in the
night when all were asleep, and took three of her trinkets, a golden
ring, a golden necklace, and a golden brooch, and packed the three
dresses--of the sun, the moon, and the stars--up in a nutshell, and
wrapped herself up in the mantle made of all sorts of fur, and besmeared
her face and hands with soot. Then she threw herself upon Heaven for
help in her need, and went away, and journeyed on the whole night, till
at last she came to a large wood. As she was very tired, she sat herself
down in the hollow of a tree and soon fell asleep: and there she slept
on till it was midday.

Now as the king to whom the wood belonged was hunting in it, his dogs
came to the tree, and began to snuff about, and run round and round, and
bark. ‘Look sharp!’ said the king to the huntsmen, ‘and see what sort
of game lies there.’ And the huntsmen went up to the tree, and when they
came back again said, ‘In the hollow tree there lies a most wonderful
beast, such as we never saw before; its skin seems to be of a thousand
kinds of fur, but there it lies fast asleep.’ ‘See,’ said the king, ‘if
you can catch it alive, and we will take it with us.’ So the huntsmen
took it up, and the maiden awoke and was greatly frightened, and said,
‘I am a poor child that has neither father nor mother left; have pity on
me and take me with you.’ Then they said, ‘Yes, Miss Cat-skin, you will
do for the kitchen; you can sweep up the ashes, and do things of that
sort.’ So they put her into the coach, and took her home to the king’s
palace. Then they showed her a little corner under the staircase, where
no light of day ever peeped in, and said, ‘Cat-skin, you may lie and
sleep there.’ And she was sent into the kitchen, and made to fetch wood
and water, to blow the fire, pluck the poultry, pick the herbs, sift the
ashes, and do all the dirty work.

Thus Cat-skin lived for a long time very sorrowfully. ‘Ah! pretty
princess!’ thought she, ‘what will now become of thee?’ But it happened
one day that a feast was to be held in the king’s castle, so she said to
the cook, ‘May I go up a little while and see what is going on? I will
take care and stand behind the door.’ And the cook said, ‘Yes, you may
go, but be back again in half an hour’s time, to rake out the ashes.’
Then she took her little lamp, and went into her cabin, and took off the
fur skin, and washed the soot from off her face and hands, so that her
beauty shone forth like the sun from behind the clouds. She next opened
her nutshell, and brought out of it the dress that shone like the sun,
and so went to the feast. Everyone made way for her, for nobody knew
her, and they thought she could be no less than a king’s daughter. But
the king came up to her, and held out his hand and danced with her; and
he thought in his heart, ‘I never saw any one half so beautiful.’

When the dance was at an end she curtsied; and when the king looked
round for her, she was gone, no one knew wither. The guards that stood
at the castle gate were called in: but they had seen no one. The truth
was, that she had run into her little cabin, pulled off her dress,
blackened her face and hands, put on the fur-skin cloak, and was
Cat-skin again. When she went into the kitchen to her work, and began
to rake the ashes, the cook said, ‘Let that alone till the morning, and
heat the king’s soup; I should like to run up now and give a peep: but
take care you don’t let a hair fall into it, or you will run a chance of
never eating again.’

As soon as the cook went away, Cat-skin heated the king’s soup, and
toasted a slice of bread first, as nicely as ever she could; and when it
was ready, she went and looked in the cabin for her little golden ring,
and put it into the dish in which the soup was. When the dance was over,
the king ordered his soup to be brought in; and it pleased him so well,
that he thought he had never tasted any so good before. At the bottom
he saw a gold ring lying; and as he could not make out how it had got
there, he ordered the cook to be sent for. The cook was frightened when
he heard the order, and said to Cat-skin, ‘You must have let a hair fall
into the soup; if it be so, you will have a good beating.’ Then he went
before the king, and he asked him who had cooked the soup. ‘I did,’
answered the cook. But the king said, ‘That is not true; it was better
done than you could do it.’ Then he answered, ‘To tell the truth I did
not cook it, but Cat-skin did.’ ‘Then let Cat-skin come up,’ said the
king: and when she came he said to her, ‘Who are you?’ ‘I am a poor
child,’ said she, ‘that has lost both father and mother.’ ‘How came you
in my palace?’ asked he. ‘I am good for nothing,’ said she, ‘but to be
scullion-girl, and to have boots and shoes thrown at my head.’ ‘But how
did you get the ring that was in the soup?’ asked the king. Then she
would not own that she knew anything about the ring; so the king sent
her away again about her business.

After a time there was another feast, and Cat-skin asked the cook to let
her go up and see it as before. ‘Yes,’ said he, ‘but come again in half
an hour, and cook the king the soup that he likes so much.’ Then she
ran to her little cabin, washed herself quickly, and took her dress
out which was silvery as the moon, and put it on; and when she went in,
looking like a king’s daughter, the king went up to her, and rejoiced at
seeing her again, and when the dance began he danced with her. After the
dance was at an end she managed to slip out, so slyly that the king did
not see where she was gone; but she sprang into her little cabin, and
made herself into Cat-skin again, and went into the kitchen to cook the
soup. Whilst the cook was above stairs, she got the golden necklace and
dropped it into the soup; then it was brought to the king, who ate it,
and it pleased him as well as before; so he sent for the cook, who
was again forced to tell him that Cat-skin had cooked it. Cat-skin was
brought again before the king, but she still told him that she was only
fit to have boots and shoes thrown at her head.

But when the king had ordered a feast to be got ready for the third
time, it happened just the same as before. ‘You must be a witch,
Cat-skin,’ said the cook; ‘for you always put something into your soup,
so that it pleases the king better than mine.’ However, he let her go up
as before. Then she put on her dress which sparkled like the stars, and
went into the ball-room in it; and the king danced with her again, and
thought she had never looked so beautiful as she did then. So whilst
he was dancing with her, he put a gold ring on her finger without her
seeing it, and ordered that the dance should be kept up a long time.
When it was at an end, he would have held her fast by the hand, but she
slipped away, and sprang so quickly through the crowd that he lost sight
of her: and she ran as fast as she could into her little cabin under
the stairs. But this time she kept away too long, and stayed beyond the
half-hour; so she had not time to take off her fine dress, and threw her
fur mantle over it, and in her haste did not blacken herself all over
with soot, but left one of her fingers white.

Then she ran into the kitchen, and cooked the king’s soup; and as soon
as the cook was gone, she put the golden brooch into the dish. When the
king got to the bottom, he ordered Cat-skin to be called once more, and
soon saw the white finger, and the ring that he had put on it whilst
they were dancing: so he seized her hand, and kept fast hold of it, and
when she wanted to loose herself and spring away, the fur cloak fell off
a little on one side, and the starry dress sparkled underneath it.

Then he got hold of the fur and tore it off, and her golden hair and
beautiful form were seen, and she could no longer hide herself: so she
washed the soot and ashes from her face, and showed herself to be the
most beautiful princess upon the face of the earth. But the king said,
‘You are my beloved bride, and we will never more be parted from each
other.’ And the wedding feast was held, and a merry day it was, as ever
was heard of or seen in that country, or indeed in any other.




SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED

There was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage. In front of
the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose-trees, one of which bore
white and the other red roses. She had two children who were like the
two rose-trees, and one was called Snow-white, and the other Rose-red.
They were as good and happy, as busy and cheerful as ever two children
in the world were, only Snow-white was more quiet and gentle than
Rose-red. Rose-red liked better to run about in the meadows and fields
seeking flowers and catching butterflies; but Snow-white sat at home
with her mother, and helped her with her housework, or read to her when
there was nothing to do.

The two children were so fond of one another that they always held each
other by the hand when they went out together, and when Snow-white said:
‘We will not leave each other,’ Rose-red answered: ‘Never so long as we
live,’ and their mother would add: ‘What one has she must share with the
other.’

They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries, and no
beasts did them any harm, but came close to them trustfully. The little
hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out of their hands, the roe grazed by
their side, the stag leapt merrily by them, and the birds sat still upon
the boughs, and sang whatever they knew.

No mishap overtook them; if they had stayed too late in the forest, and
night came on, they laid themselves down near one another upon the moss,
and slept until morning came, and their mother knew this and did not
worry on their account.

Once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn had roused
them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white dress sitting near
their bed. He got up and looked quite kindly at them, but said nothing
and went into the forest. And when they looked round they found that
they had been sleeping quite close to a precipice, and would certainly
have fallen into it in the darkness if they had gone only a few paces
further. And their mother told them that it must have been the angel who
watches over good children.

Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother’s little cottage so neat that
it was a pleasure to look inside it. In the summer Rose-red took care
of the house, and every morning laid a wreath of flowers by her mother’s
bed before she awoke, in which was a rose from each tree. In the winter
Snow-white lit the fire and hung the kettle on the hob. The kettle
was of brass and shone like gold, so brightly was it polished. In the
evening, when the snowflakes fell, the mother said: ‘Go, Snow-white, and
bolt the door,’ and then they sat round the hearth, and the mother took
her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book, and the two girls
listened as they sat and spun. And close by them lay a lamb upon the
floor, and behind them upon a perch sat a white dove with its head
hidden beneath its wings.

One evening, as they were thus sitting comfortably together, someone
knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in. The mother said:
‘Quick, Rose-red, open the door, it must be a traveller who is seeking
shelter.’ Rose-red went and pushed back the bolt, thinking that it was a
poor man, but it was not; it was a bear that stretched his broad, black
head within the door.

Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered,
and Snow-white hid herself behind her mother’s bed. But the bear began
to speak and said: ‘Do not be afraid, I will do you no harm! I am
half-frozen, and only want to warm myself a little beside you.’

‘Poor bear,’ said the mother, ‘lie down by the fire, only take care that
you do not burn your coat.’ Then she cried: ‘Snow-white, Rose-red, come
out, the bear will do you no harm, he means well.’ So they both came
out, and by-and-by the lamb and dove came nearer, and were not afraid
of him. The bear said: ‘Here, children, knock the snow out of my coat a
little’; so they brought the broom and swept the bear’s hide clean;
and he stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and
comfortably. It was not long before they grew quite at home, and played
tricks with their clumsy guest. They tugged his hair with their hands,
put their feet upon his back and rolled him about, or they took a
hazel-switch and beat him, and when he growled they laughed. But the
bear took it all in good part, only when they were too rough he called
out: ‘Leave me alive, children,

  Snow-white, Rose-red,
  Will you beat your wooer dead?’

When it was bed-time, and the others went to bed, the mother said to the
bear: ‘You can lie there by the hearth, and then you will be safe from
the cold and the bad weather.’ As soon as day dawned the two children
let him out, and he trotted across the snow into the forest.

Henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laid himself
down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselves with him as
much as they liked; and they got so used to him that the doors were
never fastened until their black friend had arrived.

When spring had come and all outside was green, the bear said one
morning to Snow-white: ‘Now I must go away, and cannot come back for the
whole summer.’ ‘Where are you going, then, dear bear?’ asked Snow-white.
‘I must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked
dwarfs. In the winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they are obliged
to stay below and cannot work their way through; but now, when the sun
has thawed and warmed the earth, they break through it, and come out to
pry and steal; and what once gets into their hands, and in their caves,
does not easily see daylight again.’

Snow-white was quite sorry at his departure, and as she unbolted the
door for him, and the bear was hurrying out, he caught against the bolt
and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off, and it seemed to Snow-white
as if she had seen gold shining through it, but she was not sure about
it. The bear ran away quickly, and was soon out of sight behind the
trees.

A short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the forest
to get firewood. There they found a big tree which lay felled on the
ground, and close by the trunk something was jumping backwards and
forwards in the grass, but they could not make out what it was. When
they came nearer they saw a dwarf with an old withered face and a
snow-white beard a yard long. The end of the beard was caught in a
crevice of the tree, and the little fellow was jumping about like a dog
tied to a rope, and did not know what to do.

He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried: ‘Why do you
stand there? Can you not come here and help me?’ ‘What are you up to,
little man?’ asked Rose-red. ‘You stupid, prying goose!’ answered the
dwarf: ‘I was going to split the tree to get a little wood for cooking.
The little bit of food that we people get is immediately burnt up with
heavy logs; we do not swallow so much as you coarse, greedy folk. I had
just driven the wedge safely in, and everything was going as I wished;
but the cursed wedge was too smooth and suddenly sprang out, and the
tree closed so quickly that I could not pull out my beautiful white
beard; so now it is tight and I cannot get away, and the silly, sleek,
milk-faced things laugh! Ugh! how odious you are!’

The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard out, it
was caught too fast. ‘I will run and fetch someone,’ said Rose-red. ‘You
senseless goose!’ snarled the dwarf; ‘why should you fetch someone? You
are already two too many for me; can you not think of something better?’
‘Don’t be impatient,’ said Snow-white, ‘I will help you,’ and she pulled
her scissors out of her pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.

As soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag which lay
amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold, and lifted it
up, grumbling to himself: ‘Uncouth people, to cut off a piece of my fine
beard. Bad luck to you!’ and then he swung the bag upon his back, and
went off without even once looking at the children.

Some time afterwards Snow-white and Rose-red went to catch a dish
of fish. As they came near the brook they saw something like a large
grasshopper jumping towards the water, as if it were going to leap in.
They ran to it and found it was the dwarf. ‘Where are you going?’ said
Rose-red; ‘you surely don’t want to go into the water?’ ‘I am not such
a fool!’ cried the dwarf; ‘don’t you see that the accursed fish wants
to pull me in?’ The little man had been sitting there fishing, and
unluckily the wind had tangled up his beard with the fishing-line; a
moment later a big fish made a bite and the feeble creature had not
strength to pull it out; the fish kept the upper hand and pulled the
dwarf towards him. He held on to all the reeds and rushes, but it was of
little good, for he was forced to follow the movements of the fish, and
was in urgent danger of being dragged into the water.

The girls came just in time; they held him fast and tried to free his
beard from the line, but all in vain, beard and line were entangled fast
together. There was nothing to do but to bring out the scissors and cut
the beard, whereby a small part of it was lost. When the dwarf saw that
he screamed out: ‘Is that civil, you toadstool, to disfigure a man’s
face? Was it not enough to clip off the end of my beard? Now you have
cut off the best part of it. I cannot let myself be seen by my people.
I wish you had been made to run the soles off your shoes!’ Then he took
out a sack of pearls which lay in the rushes, and without another word
he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.

It happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two children to the
town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons. The road led them
across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock lay strewn about. There
they noticed a large bird hovering in the air, flying slowly round and
round above them; it sank lower and lower, and at last settled near a
rock not far away. Immediately they heard a loud, piteous cry. They ran
up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance
the dwarf, and was going to carry him off.

The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the little man,
and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let his booty go.
As soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright he cried
with his shrill voice: ‘Could you not have done it more carefully! You
dragged at my brown coat so that it is all torn and full of holes, you
clumsy creatures!’ Then he took up a sack full of precious stones, and
slipped away again under the rock into his hole. The girls, who by
this time were used to his ingratitude, went on their way and did their
business in town.

As they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised the
dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in a clean spot,
and had not thought that anyone would come there so late. The evening
sun shone upon the brilliant stones; they glittered and sparkled with
all colours so beautifully that the children stood still and stared
at them. ‘Why do you stand gaping there?’ cried the dwarf, and his
ashen-grey face became copper-red with rage. He was still cursing when a
loud growling was heard, and a black bear came trotting towards them out
of the forest. The dwarf sprang up in a fright, but he could not reach
his cave, for the bear was already close. Then in the dread of his heart
he cried: ‘Dear Mr Bear, spare me, I will give you all my treasures;
look, the beautiful jewels lying there! Grant me my life; what do you
want with such a slender little fellow as I? you would not feel me
between your teeth. Come, take these two wicked girls, they are tender
morsels for you, fat as young quails; for mercy’s sake eat them!’ The
bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creature a single
blow with his paw, and he did not move again.

The girls had run away, but the bear called to them: ‘Snow-white and
Rose-red, do not be afraid; wait, I will come with you.’ Then they
recognized his voice and waited, and when he came up to them suddenly
his bearskin fell off, and he stood there a handsome man, clothed all in
gold. ‘I am a king’s son,’ he said, ‘and I was bewitched by that wicked
dwarf, who had stolen my treasures; I have had to run about the forest
as a savage bear until I was freed by his death. Now he has got his
well-deserved punishment.

Snow-white was married to him, and Rose-red to his brother, and they
divided between them the great treasure which the dwarf had gathered
together in his cave. The old mother lived peacefully and happily with
her children for many years. She took the two rose-trees with her, and
they stood before her window, and every year bore the most beautiful
roses, white and red.

HOW THE WHALE GOT HIS THROAT

IN the sea, once upon a time, O my Best Beloved, there was a Whale, and
he ate fishes. He ate the starfish and the garfish, and the crab and the
dab, and the plaice and the dace, and the skate and his mate, and the
mackereel and the pickereel, and the really truly twirly-whirly eel. All
the fishes he could find in all the sea he ate with his mouth--so! Till
at last there was only one small fish left in all the sea, and he was a
small ‘Stute Fish, and he swam a little behind the Whale’s right ear,
so as to be out of harm’s way. Then the Whale stood up on his tail and
said, ‘I’m hungry.’ And the small ‘Stute Fish said in a small ‘stute
voice, ‘Noble and generous Cetacean, have you ever tasted Man?’

‘No,’ said the Whale. ‘What is it like?’

‘Nice,’ said the small ‘Stute Fish. ‘Nice but nubbly.’

‘Then fetch me some,’ said the Whale, and he made the sea froth up with
his tail.

‘One at a time is enough,’ said the ‘Stute Fish. ‘If you swim to
latitude Fifty North, longitude Forty West (that is magic), you will
find, sitting _on_ a raft, _in_ the middle of the sea, with nothing on
but a pair of blue canvas breeches, a pair of suspenders (you must _not_
forget the suspenders, Best Beloved), and a jack-knife, one
ship-wrecked Mariner, who, it is only fair to tell you, is a man of
infinite-resource-and-sagacity.’

So the Whale swam and swam to latitude Fifty North, longitude Forty
West, as fast as he could swim, and _on_ a raft, _in_ the middle of the
sea, _with_ nothing to wear except a pair of blue canvas breeches, a
pair of suspenders (you must particularly remember the suspenders, Best
Beloved), _and_ a jack-knife, he found one single, solitary shipwrecked
Mariner, trailing his toes in the water. (He had his mummy’s leave to
paddle, or else he would never have done it, because he was a man of
infinite-resource-and-sagacity.)

Then the Whale opened his mouth back and back and back till it nearly
touched his tail, and he swallowed the shipwrecked Mariner, and the
raft he was sitting on, and his blue canvas breeches, and the suspenders
(which you _must_ not forget), _and_ the jack-knife--He swallowed them
all down into his warm, dark, inside cup-boards, and then he smacked his
lips--so, and turned round three times on his tail.

But as soon as the Mariner, who was a man of
infinite-resource-and-sagacity, found himself truly inside the Whale’s
warm, dark, inside cup-boards, he stumped and he jumped and he thumped
and he bumped, and he pranced and he danced, and he banged and he
clanged, and he hit and he bit, and he leaped and he creeped, and he
prowled and he howled, and he hopped and he dropped, and he cried and he
sighed, and he crawled and he bawled, and he stepped and he lepped, and
he danced hornpipes where he shouldn’t, and the Whale felt most unhappy
indeed. (_Have_ you forgotten the suspenders?)

So he said to the ‘Stute Fish, ‘This man is very nubbly, and besides he
is making me hiccough. What shall I do?’

‘Tell him to come out,’ said the ‘Stute Fish.

So the Whale called down his own throat to the shipwrecked Mariner,
‘Come out and behave yourself. I’ve got the hiccoughs.’

‘Nay, nay!’ said the Mariner. ‘Not so, but far otherwise. Take me to my
natal-shore and the white-cliffs-of-Albion, and I’ll think about it.’
And he began to dance more than ever.

 ‘You had better take him home,’ said the ‘Stute Fish to the Whale.
 ‘I ought to have warned you that he is a man of infinite-resource-and-sagacity.’

So the Whale swam and swam and swam, with both flippers and his tail,
as hard as he could for the hiccoughs; and at last he saw the Mariner’s
natal-shore and the white-cliffs-of-Albion, and he rushed half-way
up the beach, and opened his mouth wide and wide and wide, and said,
‘Change here for Winchester, Ashuelot, Nashua, Keene, and stations on
the _Fitch_burg Road;’ and just as he said ‘Fitch’ the Mariner walked
out of his mouth. But while the Whale had been swimming, the Mariner,
who was indeed a person of infinite-resource-and-sagacity, had taken his
jack-knife and cut up the raft into a little square grating all running
criss-cross, and he had tied it firm with his suspenders (_now_, you
know why you were not to forget the suspenders!), and he dragged that
grating good and tight into the Whale’s throat, and there it stuck! Then
he recited the following _Sloka_, which, as you have not heard it, I
will now proceed to relate--

  By means of a grating
  I have stopped your ating.

For the Mariner he was also an Hi-ber-ni-an. And he stepped out on the
shingle, and went home to his mother, who had given him leave to trail
his toes in the water; and he married and lived happily ever afterward.
So did the Whale. But from that day on, the grating in his throat,
which he could neither cough up nor swallow down, prevented him eating
anything except very, very small fish; and that is the reason why whales
nowadays never eat men or boys or little girls.

The small ‘Stute Fish went and hid himself in the mud under the
Door-sills of the Equator. He was afraid that the Whale might be angry
with him.

The Sailor took the jack-knife home. He was wearing the blue canvas
breeches when he walked out on the shingle. The suspenders were left
behind, you see, to tie the grating with; and that is the end of _that_
tale.


     WHEN the cabin port-holes are dark and green
       Because of the seas outside;
     When the ship goes _wop_ (with a wiggle between)
     And the steward falls into the soup-tureen,
       And the trunks begin to slide;
     When Nursey lies on the floor in a heap,
     And Mummy tells you to let her sleep,
     And you aren’t waked or washed or dressed,
     Why, then you will know (if you haven’t guessed)
     You’re ‘Fifty North and Forty West!’




HOW THE CAMEL GOT HIS HUMP

NOW this is the next tale, and it tells how the Camel got his big hump.

In the beginning of years, when the world was so new and all, and the
Animals were just beginning to work for Man, there was a Camel, and he
lived in the middle of a Howling Desert because he did not want to work;
and besides, he was a Howler himself. So he ate sticks and thorns and
tamarisks and milkweed and prickles, most ‘scruciating idle; and when
anybody spoke to him he said ‘Humph!’ Just ‘Humph!’ and no more.

Presently the Horse came to him on Monday morning, with a saddle on his
back and a bit in his mouth, and said, ‘Camel, O Camel, come out and
trot like the rest of us.’

‘Humph!’ said the Camel; and the Horse went away and told the Man.

Presently the Dog came to him, with a stick in his mouth, and said,
‘Camel, O Camel, come and fetch and carry like the rest of us.’

‘Humph!’ said the Camel; and the Dog went away and told the Man.

Presently the Ox came to him, with the yoke on his neck and said,
‘Camel, O Camel, come and plough like the rest of us.’

‘Humph!’ said the Camel; and the Ox went away and told the Man.

At the end of the day the Man called the Horse and the Dog and the Ox
together, and said, ‘Three, O Three, I’m very sorry for you (with the
world so new-and-all); but that Humph-thing in the Desert can’t work,
or he would have been here by now, so I am going to leave him alone, and
you must work double-time to make up for it.’

That made the Three very angry (with the world so new-and-all), and they
held a palaver, and an _indaba_, and a _punchayet_, and a pow-wow on
the edge of the Desert; and the Camel came chewing on milkweed _most_
‘scruciating idle, and laughed at them. Then he said ‘Humph!’ and went
away again.

Presently there came along the Djinn in charge of All Deserts, rolling
in a cloud of dust (Djinns always travel that way because it is Magic),
and he stopped to palaver and pow-pow with the Three.

‘Djinn of All Deserts,’ said the Horse, ‘is it right for any one to be
idle, with the world so new-and-all?’

‘Certainly not,’ said the Djinn.

‘Well,’ said the Horse, ‘there’s a thing in the middle of your Howling
Desert (and he’s a Howler himself) with a long neck and long legs, and
he hasn’t done a stroke of work since Monday morning. He won’t trot.’

‘Whew!’ said the Djinn, whistling, ‘that’s my Camel, for all the gold in
Arabia! What does he say about it?’

‘He says “Humph!”’ said the Dog; ‘and he won’t fetch and carry.’

‘Does he say anything else?’

‘Only “Humph!”; and he won’t plough,’ said the Ox.

‘Very good,’ said the Djinn. ‘I’ll humph him if you will kindly wait a
minute.’

The Djinn rolled himself up in his dust-cloak, and took a bearing across
the desert, and found the Camel most ‘scruciatingly idle, looking at his
own reflection in a pool of water.

‘My long and bubbling friend,’ said the Djinn, ‘what’s this I hear of
your doing no work, with the world so new-and-all?’

‘Humph!’ said the Camel.

The Djinn sat down, with his chin in his hand, and began to think a
Great Magic, while the Camel looked at his own reflection in the pool of
water.

‘You’ve given the Three extra work ever since Monday morning, all on
account of your ‘scruciating idleness,’ said the Djinn; and he went on
thinking Magics, with his chin in his hand.

‘Humph!’ said the Camel.

‘I shouldn’t say that again if I were you,’ said the Djinn; you might
say it once too often. Bubbles, I want you to work.’

And the Camel said ‘Humph!’ again; but no sooner had he said it than he
saw his back, that he was so proud of, puffing up and puffing up into a
great big lolloping humph.

‘Do you see that?’ said the Djinn. ‘That’s your very own humph that
you’ve brought upon your very own self by not working. To-day is
Thursday, and you’ve done no work since Monday, when the work began. Now
you are going to work.’

‘How can I,’ said the Camel, ‘with this humph on my back?’

‘That’s made a-purpose,’ said the Djinn, ‘all because you missed those
three days. You will be able to work now for three days without eating,
because you can live on your humph; and don’t you ever say I never
did anything for you. Come out of the Desert and go to the Three, and
behave. Humph yourself!’

And the Camel humphed himself, humph and all, and went away to join the
Three. And from that day to this the Camel always wears a humph (we call
it ‘hump’ now, not to hurt his feelings); but he has never yet caught up
with the three days that he missed at the beginning of the world, and he
has never yet learned how to behave.


     THE Camel’s hump is an ugly lump
       Which well you may see at the Zoo;
     But uglier yet is the hump we get
       From having too little to do.

     Kiddies and grown-ups too-oo-oo,
     If we haven’t enough to do-oo-oo,
         We get the hump--
         Cameelious hump--
     The hump that is black and blue!

     We climb out of bed with a frouzly head
       And a snarly-yarly voice.
     We shiver and scowl and we grunt and we growl
       At our bath and our boots and our toys;

     And there ought to be a corner for me
     (And I know there is one for you)
         When we get the hump--
         Cameelious hump--
     The hump that is black and blue!

     The cure for this ill is not to sit still,
       Or frowst with a book by the fire;
     But to take a large hoe and a shovel also,
       And dig till you gently perspire;

     And then you will find that the sun and the wind.
     And the Djinn of the Garden too,
         Have lifted the hump--
         The horrible hump--
     The hump that is black and blue!

     I get it as well as you-oo-oo--
     If I haven’t enough to do-oo-oo--
         We all get hump--
         Cameelious hump--
     Kiddies and grown-ups too!




HOW THE RHINOCEROS GOT HIS SKIN

ONCE upon a time, on an uninhabited island on the shores of the Red Sea,
there lived a Parsee from whose hat the rays of the sun were reflected
in more-than-oriental splendour. And the Parsee lived by the Red Sea
with nothing but his hat and his knife and a cooking-stove of the kind
that you must particularly never touch. And one day he took flour and
water and currants and plums and sugar and things, and made himself one
cake which was two feet across and three feet thick. It was indeed a
Superior Comestible (that’s magic), and he put it on stove because he
was allowed to cook on the stove, and he baked it and he baked it till
it was all done brown and smelt most sentimental. But just as he
was going to eat it there came down to the beach from the Altogether
Uninhabited Interior one Rhinoceros with a horn on his nose, two piggy
eyes, and few manners. In those days the Rhinoceros’s skin fitted him
quite tight. There were no wrinkles in it anywhere. He looked exactly
like a Noah’s Ark Rhinoceros, but of course much bigger. All the same,
he had no manners then, and he has no manners now, and he never will
have any manners. He said, ‘How!’ and the Parsee left that cake and
climbed to the top of a palm tree with nothing on but his hat, from
which the rays of the sun were always reflected in more-than-oriental
splendour. And the Rhinoceros upset the oil-stove with his nose, and
the cake rolled on the sand, and he spiked that cake on the horn of his
nose, and he ate it, and he went away, waving his tail, to the desolate
and Exclusively Uninhabited Interior which abuts on the islands of
Mazanderan, Socotra, and Promontories of the Larger Equinox. Then the
Parsee came down from his palm-tree and put the stove on its legs and
recited the following Sloka, which, as you have not heard, I will now
proceed to relate:--

  Them that takes cakes
  Which the Parsee-man bakes
  Makes dreadful mistakes.

And there was a great deal more in that than you would think.

Because, five weeks later, there was a heat wave in the Red Sea, and
everybody took off all the clothes they had. The Parsee took off his
hat; but the Rhinoceros took off his skin and carried it over his
shoulder as he came down to the beach to bathe. In those days it
buttoned underneath with three buttons and looked like a waterproof. He
said nothing whatever about the Parsee’s cake, because he had eaten
it all; and he never had any manners, then, since, or henceforward.
He waddled straight into the water and blew bubbles through his nose,
leaving his skin on the beach.

Presently the Parsee came by and found the skin, and he smiled one smile
that ran all round his face two times. Then he danced three times round
the skin and rubbed his hands. Then he went to his camp and filled his
hat with cake-crumbs, for the Parsee never ate anything but cake, and
never swept out his camp. He took that skin, and he shook that skin, and
he scrubbed that skin, and he rubbed that skin just as full of old,
dry, stale, tickly cake-crumbs and some burned currants as ever it could
possibly hold. Then he climbed to the top of his palm-tree and waited
for the Rhinoceros to come out of the water and put it on.

And the Rhinoceros did. He buttoned it up with the three buttons, and
it tickled like cake crumbs in bed. Then he wanted to scratch, but that
made it worse; and then he lay down on the sands and rolled and rolled
and rolled, and every time he rolled the cake crumbs tickled him worse
and worse and worse. Then he ran to the palm-tree and rubbed and rubbed
and rubbed himself against it. He rubbed so much and so hard that he
rubbed his skin into a great fold over his shoulders, and another fold
underneath, where the buttons used to be (but he rubbed the buttons
off), and he rubbed some more folds over his legs. And it spoiled his
temper, but it didn’t make the least difference to the cake-crumbs.
They were inside his skin and they tickled. So he went home, very angry
indeed and horribly scratchy; and from that day to this every rhinoceros
has great folds in his skin and a very bad temper, all on account of the
cake-crumbs inside.

But the Parsee came down from his palm-tree, wearing his hat, from which
the rays of the sun were reflected in more-than-oriental splendour,
packed up his cooking-stove, and went away in the direction of Orotavo,
Amygdala, the Upland Meadows of Anantarivo, and the Marshes of Sonaput.


     THIS Uninhabited Island
       Is off Cape Gardafui,
     By the Beaches of Socotra
       And the Pink Arabian Sea:
     But it’s hot--too hot from Suez
       For the likes of you and me
         Ever to go
         In a P. and O.
     And call on the Cake-Parsee!




HOW THE LEOPARD GOT HIS SPOTS

IN the days when everybody started fair, Best Beloved, the Leopard lived
in a place called the High Veldt. ‘Member it wasn’t the Low Veldt, or
the Bush Veldt, or the Sour Veldt, but the ‘sclusively bare, hot, shiny
High Veldt, where there was sand and sandy-coloured rock and ‘sclusively
tufts of sandy-yellowish grass. The Giraffe and the Zebra and the Eland
and the Koodoo and the Hartebeest lived there; and they were ‘sclusively
sandy-yellow-brownish all over; but the Leopard, he was the ‘sclusivest
sandiest-yellowish-brownest of them all--a greyish-yellowish
catty-shaped kind of beast, and he matched the ‘sclusively
yellowish-greyish-brownish colour of the High Veldt to one hair. This
was very bad for the Giraffe and the Zebra and the rest of them; for
he would lie down by a ‘sclusively yellowish-greyish-brownish stone or
clump of grass, and when the Giraffe or the Zebra or the Eland or the
Koodoo or the Bush-Buck or the Bonte-Buck came by he would surprise them
out of their jumpsome lives. He would indeed! And, also, there was an
Ethiopian with bows and arrows (a ‘sclusively greyish-brownish-yellowish
man he was then), who lived on the High Veldt with the Leopard; and the
two used to hunt together--the Ethiopian with his bows and arrows, and
the Leopard ‘sclusively with his teeth and claws--till the Giraffe and
the Eland and the Koodoo and the Quagga and all the rest of them didn’t
know which way to jump, Best Beloved. They didn’t indeed!

After a long time--things lived for ever so long in those days--they
learned to avoid anything that looked like a Leopard or an Ethiopian;
and bit by bit--the Giraffe began it, because his legs were the
longest--they went away from the High Veldt. They scuttled for days
and days and days till they came to a great forest, ‘sclusively full of
trees and bushes and stripy, speckly, patchy-blatchy shadows, and there
they hid: and after another long time, what with standing half in the
shade and half out of it, and what with the slippery-slidy shadows of
the trees falling on them, the Giraffe grew blotchy, and the Zebra grew
stripy, and the Eland and the Koodoo grew darker, with little wavy grey
lines on their backs like bark on a tree trunk; and so, though you could
hear them and smell them, you could very seldom see them, and then only
when you knew precisely where to look. They had a beautiful time in the
‘sclusively speckly-spickly shadows of the forest, while the Leopard and
the Ethiopian ran about over the ‘sclusively greyish-yellowish-reddish
High Veldt outside, wondering where all their breakfasts and their
dinners and their teas had gone. At last they were so hungry that they
ate rats and beetles and rock-rabbits, the Leopard and the Ethiopian,
and then they had the Big Tummy-ache, both together; and then they met
Baviaan--the dog-headed, barking Baboon, who is Quite the Wisest Animal
in All South Africa.

Said Leopard to Baviaan (and it was a very hot day), ‘Where has all the
game gone?’

And Baviaan winked. He knew.

Said the Ethiopian to Baviaan, ‘Can you tell me the present habitat
of the aboriginal Fauna?’ (That meant just the same thing, but the
Ethiopian always used long words. He was a grown-up.)

And Baviaan winked. He knew.

Then said Baviaan, ‘The game has gone into other spots; and my advice to
you, Leopard, is to go into other spots as soon as you can.’

And the Ethiopian said, ‘That is all very fine, but I wish to know
whither the aboriginal Fauna has migrated.’

Then said Baviaan, ‘The aboriginal Fauna has joined the aboriginal Flora
because it was high time for a change; and my advice to you, Ethiopian,
is to change as soon as you can.’

That puzzled the Leopard and the Ethiopian, but they set off to look for
the aboriginal Flora, and presently, after ever so many days, they saw
a great, high, tall forest full of tree trunks all ‘sclusively speckled
and sprottled and spottled, dotted and splashed and slashed and hatched
and cross-hatched with shadows. (Say that quickly aloud, and you will
see how very shadowy the forest must have been.)

‘What is this,’ said the Leopard, ‘that is so ‘sclusively dark, and yet
so full of little pieces of light?’

‘I don’t know, said the Ethiopian, ‘but it ought to be the aboriginal
Flora. I can smell Giraffe, and I can hear Giraffe, but I can’t see
Giraffe.’

‘That’s curious,’ said the Leopard. ‘I suppose it is because we have
just come in out of the sunshine. I can smell Zebra, and I can hear
Zebra, but I can’t see Zebra.’

‘Wait a bit, said the Ethiopian. ‘It’s a long time since we’ve hunted
‘em. Perhaps we’ve forgotten what they were like.’

‘Fiddle!’ said the Leopard. ‘I remember them perfectly on the High
Veldt, especially their marrow-bones. Giraffe is about seventeen feet
high, of a ‘sclusively fulvous golden-yellow from head to heel; and
Zebra is about four and a half feet high, of a’sclusively grey-fawn
colour from head to heel.’

‘Umm, said the Ethiopian, looking into the speckly-spickly shadows of
the aboriginal Flora-forest. ‘Then they ought to show up in this dark
place like ripe bananas in a smokehouse.’

But they didn’t. The Leopard and the Ethiopian hunted all day; and
though they could smell them and hear them, they never saw one of them.

‘For goodness’ sake,’ said the Leopard at tea-time, ‘let us wait till it
gets dark. This daylight hunting is a perfect scandal.’

So they waited till dark, and then the Leopard heard something breathing
sniffily in the starlight that fell all stripy through the branches, and
he jumped at the noise, and it smelt like Zebra, and it felt like Zebra,
and when he knocked it down it kicked like Zebra, but he couldn’t see
it. So he said, ‘Be quiet, O you person without any form. I am going to
sit on your head till morning, because there is something about you that
I don’t understand.’

Presently he heard a grunt and a crash and a scramble, and the Ethiopian
called out, ‘I’ve caught a thing that I can’t see. It smells like
Giraffe, and it kicks like Giraffe, but it hasn’t any form.’

‘Don’t you trust it,’ said the Leopard. ‘Sit on its head till the
morning--same as me. They haven’t any form--any of ‘em.’

So they sat down on them hard till bright morning-time, and then Leopard
said, ‘What have you at your end of the table, Brother?’

The Ethiopian scratched his head and said, ‘It ought to be ‘sclusively a
rich fulvous orange-tawny from head to heel, and it ought to be Giraffe;
but it is covered all over with chestnut blotches. What have you at your
end of the table, Brother?’

And the Leopard scratched his head and said, ‘It ought to be ‘sclusively
a delicate greyish-fawn, and it ought to be Zebra; but it is covered
all over with black and purple stripes. What in the world have you been
doing to yourself, Zebra? Don’t you know that if you were on the High
Veldt I could see you ten miles off? You haven’t any form.’

‘Yes,’ said the Zebra, ‘but this isn’t the High Veldt. Can’t you see?’

‘I can now,’ said the Leopard. ‘But I couldn’t all yesterday. How is it
done?’

‘Let us up,’ said the Zebra, ‘and we will show you.

They let the Zebra and the Giraffe get up; and Zebra moved away to some
little thorn-bushes where the sunlight fell all stripy, and Giraffe
moved off to some tallish trees where the shadows fell all blotchy.

‘Now watch,’ said the Zebra and the Giraffe. ‘This is the way it’s done.
One--two--three! And where’s your breakfast?’

Leopard stared, and Ethiopian stared, but all they could see were stripy
shadows and blotched shadows in the forest, but never a sign of Zebra
and Giraffe. They had just walked off and hidden themselves in the
shadowy forest.

‘Hi! Hi!’ said the Ethiopian. ‘That’s a trick worth learning. Take a
lesson by it, Leopard. You show up in this dark place like a bar of soap
in a coal-scuttle.’

‘Ho! Ho!’ said the Leopard. ‘Would it surprise you very much to know
that you show up in this dark place like a mustard-plaster on a sack of
coals?’

‘Well, calling names won’t catch dinner, said the Ethiopian. ‘The long
and the little of it is that we don’t match our backgrounds. I’m going
to take Baviaan’s advice. He told me I ought to change; and as I’ve
nothing to change except my skin I’m going to change that.’

‘What to?’ said the Leopard, tremendously excited.

‘To a nice working blackish-brownish colour, with a little purple in
it, and touches of slaty-blue. It will be the very thing for hiding in
hollows and behind trees.’

So he changed his skin then and there, and the Leopard was more excited
than ever; he had never seen a man change his skin before.

‘But what about me?’ he said, when the Ethiopian had worked his last
little finger into his fine new black skin.

‘You take Baviaan’s advice too. He told you to go into spots.’

‘So I did,’ said the Leopard. I went into other spots as fast as I
could. I went into this spot with you, and a lot of good it has done
me.’

‘Oh,’ said the Ethiopian, ‘Baviaan didn’t mean spots in South Africa. He
meant spots on your skin.’

‘What’s the use of that?’ said the Leopard.

‘Think of Giraffe,’ said the Ethiopian. ‘Or if you prefer stripes,
think of Zebra. They find their spots and stripes give them per-feet
satisfaction.’

‘Umm,’ said the Leopard. ‘I wouldn’t look like Zebra--not for ever so.’

‘Well, make up your mind,’ said the Ethiopian, ‘because I’d hate to
go hunting without you, but I must if you insist on looking like a
sun-flower against a tarred fence.’

‘I’ll take spots, then,’ said the Leopard; ‘but don’t make ‘em too
vulgar-big. I wouldn’t look like Giraffe--not for ever so.’

‘I’ll make ‘em with the tips of my fingers,’ said the Ethiopian.
‘There’s plenty of black left on my skin still. Stand over!’

Then the Ethiopian put his five fingers close together (there was plenty
of black left on his new skin still) and pressed them all over the
Leopard, and wherever the five fingers touched they left five little
black marks, all close together. You can see them on any Leopard’s skin
you like, Best Beloved. Sometimes the fingers slipped and the marks got
a little blurred; but if you look closely at any Leopard now you will
see that there are always five spots--off five fat black finger-tips.

‘Now you are a beauty!’ said the Ethiopian. ‘You can lie out on the bare
ground and look like a heap of pebbles. You can lie out on the naked
rocks and look like a piece of pudding-stone. You can lie out on a leafy
branch and look like sunshine sifting through the leaves; and you
can lie right across the centre of a path and look like nothing in
particular. Think of that and purr!’

‘But if I’m all this,’ said the Leopard, ‘why didn’t you go spotty too?’

‘Oh, plain black’s best for a nigger,’ said the Ethiopian. ‘Now come
along and we’ll see if we can’t get even with Mr. One-Two-Three Where’s
your Breakfast!’

So they went away and lived happily ever afterward, Best Beloved. That
is all.

Oh, now and then you will hear grown-ups say, ‘Can the Ethiopian change
his skin or the Leopard his spots?’ I don’t think even grown-ups would
keep on saying such a silly thing if the Leopard and the Ethiopian
hadn’t done it once--do you? But they will never do it again, Best
Beloved. They are quite contented as they are.


   I AM the Most Wise Baviaan, saying in most wise tones,
   ‘Let us melt into the landscape--just us two by our lones.’
   People have come--in a carriage--calling. But Mummy is there....
   Yes, I can go if you take me--Nurse says she don’t care.
   Let’s go up to the pig-sties and sit on the farmyard rails!
   Let’s say things to the bunnies, and watch ‘em skitter their tails!
   Let’s--oh, anything, daddy, so long as it’s you and me,
   And going truly exploring, and not being in till tea!
   Here’s your boots (I’ve brought ‘em), and here’s your cap and stick,
   And here’s your pipe and tobacco. Oh, come along out of it--quick.




THE ELEPHANT’S CHILD

IN the High and Far-Off Times the Elephant, O Best Beloved, had no
trunk. He had only a blackish, bulgy nose, as big as a boot, that he
could wriggle about from side to side; but he couldn’t pick up things
with it. But there was one Elephant--a new Elephant--an Elephant’s
Child--who was full of ‘satiable curtiosity, and that means he asked
ever so many questions. And he lived in Africa, and he filled all Africa
with his ‘satiable curtiosities. He asked his tall aunt, the Ostrich,
why her tail-feathers grew just so, and his tall aunt the Ostrich
spanked him with her hard, hard claw. He asked his tall uncle, the
Giraffe, what made his skin spotty, and his tall uncle, the Giraffe,
spanked him with his hard, hard hoof. And still he was full of ‘satiable
curtiosity! He asked his broad aunt, the Hippopotamus, why her eyes were
red, and his broad aunt, the Hippopotamus, spanked him with her broad,
broad hoof; and he asked his hairy uncle, the Baboon, why melons tasted
just so, and his hairy uncle, the Baboon, spanked him with his hairy,
hairy paw. And still he was full of ‘satiable curtiosity! He asked
questions about everything that he saw, or heard, or felt, or smelt, or
touched, and all his uncles and his aunts spanked him. And still he was
full of ‘satiable curtiosity!

One fine morning in the middle of the Precession of the Equinoxes this
‘satiable Elephant’s Child asked a new fine question that he had never
asked before. He asked, ‘What does the Crocodile have for dinner?’ Then
everybody said, ‘Hush!’ in a loud and dretful tone, and they spanked him
immediately and directly, without stopping, for a long time.

By and by, when that was finished, he came upon Kolokolo Bird sitting
in the middle of a wait-a-bit thorn-bush, and he said, ‘My father has
spanked me, and my mother has spanked me; all my aunts and uncles have
spanked me for my ‘satiable curtiosity; and still I want to know what
the Crocodile has for dinner!’

Then Kolokolo Bird said, with a mournful cry, ‘Go to the banks of the
great grey-green, greasy Limpopo River, all set about with fever-trees,
and find out.’

That very next morning, when there was nothing left of the Equinoxes,
because the Precession had preceded according to precedent, this
‘satiable Elephant’s Child took a hundred pounds of bananas (the little
short red kind), and a hundred pounds of sugar-cane (the long purple
kind), and seventeen melons (the greeny-crackly kind), and said to all
his dear families, ‘Goodbye. I am going to the great grey-green, greasy
Limpopo River, all set about with fever-trees, to find out what the
Crocodile has for dinner.’ And they all spanked him once more for luck,
though he asked them most politely to stop.

Then he went away, a little warm, but not at all astonished, eating
melons, and throwing the rind about, because he could not pick it up.

He went from Graham’s Town to Kimberley, and from Kimberley to Khama’s
Country, and from Khama’s Country he went east by north, eating melons
all the time, till at last he came to the banks of the great grey-green,
greasy Limpopo River, all set about with fever-trees, precisely as
Kolokolo Bird had said.

Now you must know and understand, O Best Beloved, that till that very
week, and day, and hour, and minute, this ‘satiable Elephant’s Child had
never seen a Crocodile, and did not know what one was like. It was all
his ‘satiable curtiosity.

The first thing that he found was a Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake curled
round a rock.

‘’Scuse me,’ said the Elephant’s Child most politely, ‘but have you seen
such a thing as a Crocodile in these promiscuous parts?’

‘Have I seen a Crocodile?’ said the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake, in a
voice of dretful scorn. ‘What will you ask me next?’

‘’Scuse me,’ said the Elephant’s Child, ‘but could you kindly tell me
what he has for dinner?’

Then the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake uncoiled himself very quickly
from the rock, and spanked the Elephant’s Child with his scalesome,
flailsome tail.

‘That is odd,’ said the Elephant’s Child, ‘because my father and my
mother, and my uncle and my aunt, not to mention my other aunt, the
Hippopotamus, and my other uncle, the Baboon, have all spanked me for my
‘satiable curtiosity--and I suppose this is the same thing.

So he said good-bye very politely to the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake,
and helped to coil him up on the rock again, and went on, a little warm,
but not at all astonished, eating melons, and throwing the rind about,
because he could not pick it up, till he trod on what he thought was
a log of wood at the very edge of the great grey-green, greasy Limpopo
River, all set about with fever-trees.

But it was really the Crocodile, O Best Beloved, and the Crocodile
winked one eye--like this!

‘’Scuse me,’ said the Elephant’s Child most politely, ‘but do you happen
to have seen a Crocodile in these promiscuous parts?’

Then the Crocodile winked the other eye, and lifted half his tail out of
the mud; and the Elephant’s Child stepped back most politely, because he
did not wish to be spanked again.

‘Come hither, Little One,’ said the Crocodile. ‘Why do you ask such
things?’

‘’Scuse me,’ said the Elephant’s Child most politely, ‘but my father has
spanked me, my mother has spanked me, not to mention my tall aunt, the
Ostrich, and my tall uncle, the Giraffe, who can kick ever so hard, as
well as my broad aunt, the Hippopotamus, and my hairy uncle, the Baboon,
and including the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake, with the scalesome,
flailsome tail, just up the bank, who spanks harder than any of them;
and so, if it’s quite all the same to you, I don’t want to be spanked
any more.’

‘Come hither, Little One,’ said the Crocodile, ‘for I am the Crocodile,’
and he wept crocodile-tears to show it was quite true.

Then the Elephant’s Child grew all breathless, and panted, and kneeled
down on the bank and said, ‘You are the very person I have been looking
for all these long days. Will you please tell me what you have for
dinner?’

‘Come hither, Little One,’ said the Crocodile, ‘and I’ll whisper.’

Then the Elephant’s Child put his head down close to the Crocodile’s
musky, tusky mouth, and the Crocodile caught him by his little nose,
which up to that very week, day, hour, and minute, had been no bigger
than a boot, though much more useful.

‘I think, said the Crocodile--and he said it between his teeth, like
this--‘I think to-day I will begin with Elephant’s Child!’

At this, O Best Beloved, the Elephant’s Child was much annoyed, and he
said, speaking through his nose, like this, ‘Led go! You are hurtig be!’

Then the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake scuffled down from the bank and
said, ‘My young friend, if you do not now, immediately and instantly,
pull as hard as ever you can, it is my opinion that your acquaintance in
the large-pattern leather ulster’ (and by this he meant the Crocodile)
‘will jerk you into yonder limpid stream before you can say Jack
Robinson.’

This is the way Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snakes always talk.

Then the Elephant’s Child sat back on his little haunches, and pulled,
and pulled, and pulled, and his nose began to stretch. And the Crocodile
floundered into the water, making it all creamy with great sweeps of his
tail, and he pulled, and pulled, and pulled.

And the Elephant’s Child’s nose kept on stretching; and the Elephant’s
Child spread all his little four legs and pulled, and pulled, and
pulled, and his nose kept on stretching; and the Crocodile threshed his
tail like an oar, and he pulled, and pulled, and pulled, and at each
pull the Elephant’s Child’s nose grew longer and longer--and it hurt him
hijjus!

Then the Elephant’s Child felt his legs slipping, and he said through
his nose, which was now nearly five feet long, ‘This is too butch for
be!’

Then the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake came down from the bank, and
knotted himself in a double-clove-hitch round the Elephant’s Child’s
hind legs, and said, ‘Rash and inexperienced traveller, we will now
seriously devote ourselves to a little high tension, because if we do
not, it is my impression that yonder self-propelling man-of-war with
the armour-plated upper deck’ (and by this, O Best Beloved, he meant the
Crocodile), ‘will permanently vitiate your future career.

That is the way all Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snakes always talk.

So he pulled, and the Elephant’s Child pulled, and the Crocodile pulled;
but the Elephant’s Child and the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake pulled
hardest; and at last the Crocodile let go of the Elephant’s Child’s nose
with a plop that you could hear all up and down the Limpopo.

Then the Elephant’s Child sat down most hard and sudden; but first he
was careful to say ‘Thank you’ to the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake; and
next he was kind to his poor pulled nose, and wrapped it all up in cool
banana leaves, and hung it in the great grey-green, greasy Limpopo to
cool.

‘What are you doing that for?’ said the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake.

‘’Scuse me,’ said the Elephant’s Child, ‘but my nose is badly out of
shape, and I am waiting for it to shrink.

‘Then you will have to wait a long time, said the
Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake. ‘Some people do not know what is good for
them.’

The Elephant’s Child sat there for three days waiting for his nose to
shrink. But it never grew any shorter, and, besides, it made him squint.
For, O Best Beloved, you will see and understand that the Crocodile
had pulled it out into a really truly trunk same as all Elephants have
to-day.

At the end of the third day a fly came and stung him on the shoulder,
and before he knew what he was doing he lifted up his trunk and hit that
fly dead with the end of it.

‘’Vantage number one!’ said the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake. ‘You
couldn’t have done that with a mere-smear nose. Try and eat a little
now.’

Before he thought what he was doing the Elephant’s Child put out his
trunk and plucked a large bundle of grass, dusted it clean against his
fore-legs, and stuffed it into his own mouth.

‘Vantage number two!’ said the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake. ‘You
couldn’t have done that with a mear-smear nose. Don’t you think the sun
is very hot here?’

‘It is,’ said the Elephant’s Child, and before he thought what he was
doing he schlooped up a schloop of mud from the banks of the great
grey-green, greasy Limpopo, and slapped it on his head, where it made a
cool schloopy-sloshy mud-cap all trickly behind his ears.

‘Vantage number three!’ said the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake. ‘You
couldn’t have done that with a mere-smear nose. Now how do you feel
about being spanked again?’

‘’Scuse me,’ said the Elephant’s Child, ‘but I should not like it at
all.’

‘How would you like to spank somebody?’ said the
Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake.

‘I should like it very much indeed,’ said the Elephant’s Child.

‘Well,’ said the Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake, ‘you will find that new
nose of yours very useful to spank people with.’

‘Thank you,’ said the Elephant’s Child, ‘I’ll remember that; and now I
think I’ll go home to all my dear families and try.’

So the Elephant’s Child went home across Africa frisking and whisking
his trunk. When he wanted fruit to eat he pulled fruit down from a tree,
instead of waiting for it to fall as he used to do. When he wanted grass
he plucked grass up from the ground, instead of going on his knees as he
used to do. When the flies bit him he broke off the branch of a tree
and used it as fly-whisk; and he made himself a new, cool, slushy-squshy
mud-cap whenever the sun was hot. When he felt lonely walking through
Africa he sang to himself down his trunk, and the noise was louder than
several brass bands.

He went especially out of his way to find a broad Hippopotamus (she was
no relation of his), and he spanked her very hard, to make sure that the
Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake had spoken the truth about his new trunk.
The rest of the time he picked up the melon rinds that he had dropped on
his way to the Limpopo--for he was a Tidy Pachyderm.

One dark evening he came back to all his dear families, and he coiled up
his trunk and said, ‘How do you do?’ They were very glad to see him,
and immediately said, ‘Come here and be spanked for your ‘satiable
curtiosity.’

‘Pooh,’ said the Elephant’s Child. ‘I don’t think you peoples know
anything about spanking; but I do, and I’ll show you.’ Then he uncurled
his trunk and knocked two of his dear brothers head over heels.

‘O Bananas!’ said they, ‘where did you learn that trick, and what have
you done to your nose?’

‘I got a new one from the Crocodile on the banks of the great
grey-green, greasy Limpopo River,’ said the Elephant’s Child. ‘I asked
him what he had for dinner, and he gave me this to keep.’

‘It looks very ugly,’ said his hairy uncle, the Baboon.

‘It does,’ said the Elephant’s Child. ‘But it’s very useful,’ and he
picked up his hairy uncle, the Baboon, by one hairy leg, and hove him
into a hornet’s nest.

Then that bad Elephant’s Child spanked all his dear families for a long
time, till they were very warm and greatly astonished. He pulled out
his tall Ostrich aunt’s tail-feathers; and he caught his tall uncle, the
Giraffe, by the hind-leg, and dragged him through a thorn-bush; and he
shouted at his broad aunt, the Hippopotamus, and blew bubbles into her
ear when she was sleeping in the water after meals; but he never let any
one touch Kolokolo Bird.

At last things grew so exciting that his dear families went off one
by one in a hurry to the banks of the great grey-green, greasy Limpopo
River, all set about with fever-trees, to borrow new noses from the
Crocodile. When they came back nobody spanked anybody any more; and ever
since that day, O Best Beloved, all the Elephants you will ever see,
besides all those that you won’t, have trunks precisely like the trunk
of the ‘satiable Elephant’s Child.


     I Keep six honest serving-men:
       (They taught me all I knew)
     Their names are What and Where and When
       And How and Why and Who.
     I send them over land and sea,
       I send them east and west;
     But after they have worked for me,
       I give them all a rest.

     I let them rest from nine till five.
       For I am busy then,
     As well as breakfast, lunch, and tea,
       For they are hungry men:
     But different folk have different views:
       I know a person small--
     She keeps ten million serving-men,
       Who get no rest at all!
     She sends ‘em abroad on her own affairs,
       From the second she opens her eyes--
     One million Hows, two million Wheres,
       And seven million Whys!




THE SING-SONG OF OLD MAN KANGAROO

NOT always was the Kangaroo as now we do behold him, but a Different
Animal with four short legs. He was grey and he was woolly, and
his pride was inordinate: he danced on an outcrop in the middle of
Australia, and he went to the Little God Nqa.

He went to Nqa at six before breakfast, saying, ‘Make me different from
all other animals by five this afternoon.’

Up jumped Nqa from his seat on the sandflat and shouted, ‘Go away!’

He was grey and he was woolly, and his pride was inordinate: he danced
on a rock-ledge in the middle of Australia, and he went to the Middle
God Nquing.

He went to Nquing at eight after breakfast, saying, ‘Make me different
from all other animals; make me, also, wonderfully popular by five this
afternoon.’

Up jumped Nquing from his burrow in the spinifex and shouted, ‘Go away!’

He was grey and he was woolly, and his pride was inordinate: he danced
on a sandbank in the middle of Australia, and he went to the Big God
Nqong.

He went to Nqong at ten before dinner-time, saying, ‘Make me different
from all other animals; make me popular and wonderfully run after by
five this afternoon.’

Up jumped Nqong from his bath in the salt-pan and shouted, ‘Yes, I
will!’

Nqong called Dingo--Yellow-Dog Dingo--always hungry, dusty in the
sunshine, and showed him Kangaroo. Nqong said, ‘Dingo! Wake up, Dingo!
Do you see that gentleman dancing on an ashpit? He wants to be popular
and very truly run after. Dingo, make him SO!’

Up jumped Dingo--Yellow-Dog Dingo--and said, ‘What, that cat-rabbit?’

Off ran Dingo--Yellow-Dog Dingo--always hungry, grinning like a
coal-scuttle,--ran after Kangaroo.

Off went the proud Kangaroo on his four little legs like a bunny.

This, O Beloved of mine, ends the first part of the tale!

He ran through the desert; he ran through the mountains; he ran through
the salt-pans; he ran through the reed-beds; he ran through the blue
gums; he ran through the spinifex; he ran till his front legs ached.

He had to!

Still ran Dingo--Yellow-Dog Dingo--always hungry, grinning like a
rat-trap, never getting nearer, never getting farther,--ran after
Kangaroo.

He had to!

Still ran Kangaroo--Old Man Kangaroo. He ran through the ti-trees; he
ran through the mulga; he ran through the long grass; he ran through the
short grass; he ran through the Tropics of Capricorn and Cancer; he ran
till his hind legs ached.

He had to!

Still ran Dingo--Yellow-Dog Dingo--hungrier and hungrier, grinning like
a horse-collar, never getting nearer, never getting farther; and they
came to the Wollgong River.

Now, there wasn’t any bridge, and there wasn’t any ferry-boat, and
Kangaroo didn’t know how to get over; so he stood on his legs and
hopped.

He had to!

He hopped through the Flinders; he hopped through the Cinders; he
hopped through the deserts in the middle of Australia. He hopped like a
Kangaroo.

First he hopped one yard; then he hopped three yards; then he hopped
five yards; his legs growing stronger; his legs growing longer. He
hadn’t any time for rest or refreshment, and he wanted them very much.

Still ran Dingo--Yellow-Dog Dingo--very much bewildered, very much
hungry, and wondering what in the world or out of it made Old Man
Kangaroo hop.

For he hopped like a cricket; like a pea in a saucepan; or a new rubber
ball on a nursery floor.

He had to!

He tucked up his front legs; he hopped on his hind legs; he stuck out
his tail for a balance-weight behind him; and he hopped through the
Darling Downs.

He had to!

Still ran Dingo--Tired-Dog Dingo--hungrier and hungrier, very much
bewildered, and wondering when in the world or out of it would Old Man
Kangaroo stop.

Then came Nqong from his bath in the salt-pans, and said, ‘It’s five
o’clock.’

Down sat Dingo--Poor Dog Dingo--always hungry, dusky in the sunshine;
hung out his tongue and howled.

Down sat Kangaroo--Old Man Kangaroo--stuck out his tail like a
milking-stool behind him, and said, ‘Thank goodness that’s finished!’

Then said Nqong, who is always a gentleman, ‘Why aren’t you grateful to
Yellow-Dog Dingo? Why don’t you thank him for all he has done for you?’

Then said Kangaroo--Tired Old Kangaroo--He’s chased me out of the homes
of my childhood; he’s chased me out of my regular meal-times; he’s
altered my shape so I’ll never get it back; and he’s played Old Scratch
with my legs.’

Then said Nqong, ‘Perhaps I’m mistaken, but didn’t you ask me to make
you different from all other animals, as well as to make you very truly
sought after? And now it is five o’clock.’

‘Yes,’ said Kangaroo. ‘I wish that I hadn’t. I thought you would do it
by charms and incantations, but this is a practical joke.’

‘Joke!’ said Nqong from his bath in the blue gums. ‘Say that again and
I’ll whistle up Dingo and run your hind legs off.’

‘No,’ said the Kangaroo. ‘I must apologise. Legs are legs, and you
needn’t alter ‘em so far as I am concerned. I only meant to explain to
Your Lordliness that I’ve had nothing to eat since morning, and I’m very
empty indeed.’

‘Yes,’ said Dingo--Yellow-Dog Dingo,--‘I am just in the same situation.
I’ve made him different from all other animals; but what may I have for
my tea?’

Then said Nqong from his bath in the salt-pan, ‘Come and ask me about it
tomorrow, because I’m going to wash.’

So they were left in the middle of Australia, Old Man Kangaroo and
Yellow-Dog Dingo, and each said, ‘That’s your fault.’


     THIS is the mouth-filling song
     Of the race that was run by a Boomer,
     Run in a single burst--only event of its kind--
     Started by big God Nqong from Warrigaborrigarooma,
     Old Man Kangaroo first: Yellow-Dog Dingo behind.

     Kangaroo bounded away,
     His back-legs working like pistons--
     Bounded from morning till dark,
     Twenty-five feet to a bound.
     Yellow-Dog Dingo lay
     Like a yellow cloud in the distance--
     Much too busy to bark.
     My! but they covered the ground!

     Nobody knows where they went,
     Or followed the track that they flew in,
     For that Continent
     Hadn’t been given a name.
     They ran thirty degrees,
     From Torres Straits to the Leeuwin
     (Look at the Atlas, please),
     And they ran back as they came.

     S’posing you could trot
     From Adelaide to the Pacific,
     For an afternoon’s run
     Half what these gentlemen did
     You would feel rather hot,
     But your legs would develop terrific--
     Yes, my importunate son,
     You’d be a Marvellous Kid!




THE BEGINNING OF THE ARMADILLOS

THIS, O Best Beloved, is another story of the High and Far-Off Times.
In the very middle of those times was a Stickly-Prickly Hedgehog, and
he lived on the banks of the turbid Amazon, eating shelly snails and
things. And he had a friend, a Slow-Solid Tortoise, who lived on the
banks of the turbid Amazon, eating green lettuces and things. And so
that was all right, Best Beloved. Do you see?

But also, and at the same time, in those High and Far-Off Times, there
was a Painted Jaguar, and he lived on the banks of the turbid Amazon
too; and he ate everything that he could catch. When he could not catch
deer or monkeys he would eat frogs and beetles; and when he could not
catch frogs and beetles he went to his Mother Jaguar, and she told him
how to eat hedgehogs and tortoises.

She said to him ever so many times, graciously waving her tail, ‘My son,
when you find a Hedgehog you must drop him into the water and then he
will uncoil, and when you catch a Tortoise you must scoop him out of his
shell with your paw.’ And so that was all right, Best Beloved.

One beautiful night on the banks of the turbid Amazon, Painted Jaguar
found Stickly-Prickly Hedgehog and Slow-Solid Tortoise sitting under the
trunk of a fallen tree. They could not run away, and so Stickly-Prickly
curled himself up into a ball, because he was a Hedgehog, and Slow-Solid
Tortoise drew in his head and feet into his shell as far as they would
go, because he was a Tortoise; and so that was all right, Best Beloved.
Do you see?

‘Now attend to me,’ said Painted Jaguar, ‘because this is very
important. My mother said that when I meet a Hedgehog I am to drop him
into the water and then he will uncoil, and when I meet a Tortoise I am
to scoop him out of his shell with my paw. Now which of you is Hedgehog
and which is Tortoise? because, to save my spots, I can’t tell.’

‘Are you sure of what your Mummy told you?’ said Stickly-Prickly
Hedgehog. ‘Are you quite sure? Perhaps she said that when you uncoil a
Tortoise you must shell him out the water with a scoop, and when you paw
a Hedgehog you must drop him on the shell.’

‘Are you sure of what your Mummy told you?’ said Slow-and-Solid
Tortoise. ‘Are you quite sure? Perhaps she said that when you water a
Hedgehog you must drop him into your paw, and when you meet a Tortoise
you must shell him till he uncoils.’

‘I don’t think it was at all like that,’ said Painted Jaguar, but he
felt a little puzzled; ‘but, please, say it again more distinctly.’

‘When you scoop water with your paw you uncoil it with a Hedgehog,’ said
Stickly-Prickly. ‘Remember that, because it’s important.’

‘But,’ said the Tortoise, ‘when you paw your meat you drop it into a
Tortoise with a scoop. Why can’t you understand?’

‘You are making my spots ache,’ said Painted Jaguar; ‘and besides, I
didn’t want your advice at all. I only wanted to know which of you is
Hedgehog and which is Tortoise.’

‘I shan’t tell you,’ said Stickly-Prickly, ‘but you can scoop me out of
my shell if you like.’

‘Aha!’ said Painted Jaguar. ‘Now I know you’re Tortoise. You thought I
wouldn’t! Now I will.’ Painted Jaguar darted out his paddy-paw just as
Stickly-Prickly curled himself up, and of course Jaguar’s paddy-paw was
just filled with prickles. Worse than that, he knocked Stickly-Prickly
away and away into the woods and the bushes, where it was too dark to
find him. Then he put his paddy-paw into his mouth, and of course the
prickles hurt him worse than ever. As soon as he could speak he said,
‘Now I know he isn’t Tortoise at all. But’--and then he scratched
his head with his un-prickly paw--‘how do I know that this other is
Tortoise?’

‘But I am Tortoise,’ said Slow-and-Solid. Your mother was quite right.
She said that you were to scoop me out of my shell with your paw.
Begin.’

‘You didn’t say she said that a minute ago, said Painted Jaguar, sucking
the prickles out of his paddy-paw. ‘You said she said something quite
different.’

‘Well, suppose you say that I said that she said something quite
different, I don’t see that it makes any difference; because if she said
what you said I said she said, it’s just the same as if I said what she
said she said. On the other hand, if you think she said that you were to
uncoil me with a scoop, instead of pawing me into drops with a shell, I
can’t help that, can I?’

‘But you said you wanted to be scooped out of your shell with my paw,’
said Painted Jaguar.

‘If you’ll think again you’ll find that I didn’t say anything of the
kind. I said that your mother said that you were to scoop me out of my
shell,’ said Slow-and-Solid.

‘What will happen if I do?’ said the Jaguar most sniffily and most
cautious.

‘I don’t know, because I’ve never been scooped out of my shell before;
but I tell you truly, if you want to see me swim away you’ve only got to
drop me into the water.

‘I don’t believe it,’ said Painted Jaguar. ‘You’ve mixed up all the
things my mother told me to do with the things that you asked me whether
I was sure that she didn’t say, till I don’t know whether I’m on my
head or my painted tail; and now you come and tell me something I can
understand, and it makes me more mixy than before. My mother told me
that I was to drop one of you two into the water, and as you seem so
anxious to be dropped I think you don’t want to be dropped. So jump into
the turbid Amazon and be quick about it.’

‘I warn you that your Mummy won’t be pleased. Don’t tell her I didn’t
tell you,’ said Slow-Solid.

‘If you say another word about what my mother said--’ the Jaguar
answered, but he had not finished the sentence before Slow-and-Solid
quietly dived into the turbid Amazon, swam under water for a long way,
and came out on the bank where Stickly-Prickly was waiting for him.

‘That was a very narrow escape,’ said Stickly-Prickly. ‘I don’t rib
Painted Jaguar. What did you tell him that you were?’

‘I told him truthfully that I was a truthful Tortoise, but he wouldn’t
believe it, and he made me jump into the river to see if I was, and I
was, and he is surprised. Now he’s gone to tell his Mummy. Listen to
him!’

They could hear Painted Jaguar roaring up and down among the trees and
the bushes by the side of the turbid Amazon, till his Mummy came.

‘Son, son!’ said his mother ever so many times, graciously waving her
tail, ‘what have you been doing that you shouldn’t have done?’

‘I tried to scoop something that said it wanted to be scooped out of
its shell with my paw, and my paw is full of per-ickles,’ said Painted
Jaguar.

‘Son, son!’ said his mother ever so many times, graciously waving her
tail, ‘by the prickles in your paddy-paw I see that that must have been
a Hedgehog. You should have dropped him into the water.

‘I did that to the other thing; and he said he was a Tortoise, and I
didn’t believe him, and it was quite true, and he has dived under the
turbid Amazon, and he won’t come up again, and I haven’t anything at all
to eat, and I think we had better find lodgings somewhere else. They are
too clever on the turbid Amazon for poor me!’

‘Son, son!’ said his mother ever so many times, graciously waving
her tail, ‘now attend to me and remember what I say. A Hedgehog curls
himself up into a ball and his prickles stick out every which way at
once. By this you may know the Hedgehog.’

‘I don’t like this old lady one little bit,’ said Stickly-Prickly, under
the shadow of a large leaf. ‘I wonder what else she knows?’

‘A Tortoise can’t curl himself up,’ Mother Jaguar went on, ever so many
times, graciously waving her tail. ‘He only draws his head and legs into
his shell. By this you may know the tortoise.’

‘I don’t like this old lady at all--at all,’ said Slow-and-Solid
Tortoise. ‘Even Painted Jaguar can’t forget those directions. It’s a
great pity that you can’t swim, Stickly-Prickly.’

‘Don’t talk to me,’ said Stickly-Prickly. ‘Just think how much better
it would be if you could curl up. This is a mess! Listen to Painted
Jaguar.’

Painted Jaguar was sitting on the banks of the turbid Amazon sucking
prickles out of his Paws and saying to himself--

  ‘Can’t curl, but can swim--
  Slow-Solid, that’s him!
  Curls up, but can’t swim--
  Stickly-Prickly, that’s him!’

‘He’ll never forget that this month of Sundays,’ said Stickly-Prickly.
‘Hold up my chin, Slow-and-Solid. I’m going to try to learn to swim. It
may be useful.’

‘Excellent!’ said Slow-and-Solid; and he held up Stickly-Prickly’s chin,
while Stickly-Prickly kicked in the waters of the turbid Amazon.

‘You’ll make a fine swimmer yet,’ said Slow-and-Solid. ‘Now, if you can
unlace my back-plates a little, I’ll see what I can do towards curling
up. It may be useful.’

Stickly-Prickly helped to unlace Tortoise’s back-plates, so that by
twisting and straining Slow-and-Solid actually managed to curl up a
tiddy wee bit.

‘Excellent!’ said Stickly-Prickly; ‘but I shouldn’t do any more just
now. It’s making you black in the face. Kindly lead me into the water
once again and I’ll practice that side-stroke which you say is so easy.’
And so Stickly-Prickly practiced, and Slow-Solid swam alongside.

‘Excellent!’ said Slow-and-Solid. ‘A little more practice will make you
a regular whale. Now, if I may trouble you to unlace my back and front
plates two holes more, I’ll try that fascinating bend that you say is so
easy. Won’t Painted Jaguar be surprised!’

‘Excellent!’ said Stickly-Prickly, all wet from the turbid Amazon. ‘I
declare, I shouldn’t know you from one of my own family. Two holes, I
think, you said? A little more expression, please, and don’t grunt quite
so much, or Painted Jaguar may hear us. When you’ve finished, I want
to try that long dive which you say is so easy. Won’t Painted Jaguar be
surprised!’

And so Stickly-Prickly dived, and Slow-and-Solid dived alongside.

‘Excellent!’ said Slow-and-Solid. ‘A leetle more attention to holding
your breath and you will be able to keep house at the bottom of the
turbid Amazon. Now I’ll try that exercise of putting my hind legs round
my ears which you say is so peculiarly comfortable. Won’t Painted Jaguar
be surprised!’

‘Excellent!’ said Stickly-Prickly. ‘But it’s straining your back-plates
a little. They are all overlapping now, instead of lying side by side.’

‘Oh, that’s the result of exercise,’ said Slow-and-Solid. ‘I’ve noticed
that your prickles seem to be melting into one another, and that
you’re growing to look rather more like a pinecone, and less like a
chestnut-burr, than you used to.’

‘Am I?’ said Stickly-Prickly. ‘That comes from my soaking in the water.
Oh, won’t Painted Jaguar be surprised!’

They went on with their exercises, each helping the other, till morning
came; and when the sun was high they rested and dried themselves. Then
they saw that they were both of them quite different from what they had
been.

‘Stickly-Prickly,’ said Tortoise after breakfast, ‘I am not what I was
yesterday; but I think that I may yet amuse Painted Jaguar.

‘That was the very thing I was thinking just now,’ said Stickly-Prickly.
‘I think scales are a tremendous improvement on prickles--to say nothing
of being able to swim. Oh, won’t Painted Jaguar be surprised! Let’s go
and find him.’

By and by they found Painted Jaguar, still nursing his paddy-paw that
had been hurt the night before. He was so astonished that he fell three
times backward over his own painted tail without stopping.

‘Good morning!’ said Stickly-Prickly. ‘And how is your dear gracious
Mummy this morning?’

‘She is quite well, thank you,’ said Painted Jaguar; ‘but you must
forgive me if I do not at this precise moment recall your name.’

‘That’s unkind of you,’ said Stickly-Prickly, ‘seeing that this time
yesterday you tried to scoop me out of my shell with your paw.’

‘But you hadn’t any shell. It was all prickles,’ said Painted Jaguar. ‘I
know it was. Just look at my paw!’

‘You told me to drop into the turbid Amazon and be drowned,’ said
Slow-Solid. ‘Why are you so rude and forgetful to-day?’

‘Don’t you remember what your mother told you?’ said Stickly-Prickly,--

  ‘Can’t curl, but can swim--
  Stickly-Prickly, that’s him!
  Curls up, but can’t swim--
  Slow-Solid, that’s him!’

Then they both curled themselves up and rolled round and round Painted
Jaguar till his eyes turned truly cart-wheels in his head.

Then he went to fetch his mother.

‘Mother,’ he said, ‘there are two new animals in the woods to-day, and
the one that you said couldn’t swim, swims, and the one that you said
couldn’t curl up, curls; and they’ve gone shares in their prickles, I
think, because both of them are scaly all over, instead of one being
smooth and the other very prickly; and, besides that, they are rolling
round and round in circles, and I don’t feel comfy.’

‘Son, son!’ said Mother Jaguar ever so many times, graciously waving her
tail, ‘a Hedgehog is a Hedgehog, and can’t be anything but a Hedgehog;
and a Tortoise is a Tortoise, and can never be anything else.’

‘But it isn’t a Hedgehog, and it isn’t a Tortoise. It’s a little bit of
both, and I don’t know its proper name.’

‘Nonsense!’ said Mother Jaguar. ‘Everything has its proper name. I
should call it “Armadillo” till I found out the real one. And I should
leave it alone.’

So Painted Jaguar did as he was told, especially about leaving them
alone; but the curious thing is that from that day to this, O Best
Beloved, no one on the banks of the turbid Amazon has ever called
Stickly-Prickly and Slow-Solid anything except Armadillo. There are
Hedgehogs and Tortoises in other places, of course (there are some in
my garden); but the real old and clever kind, with their scales lying
lippety-lappety one over the other, like pine-cone scales, that lived on
the banks of the turbid Amazon in the High and Far-Off Days, are always
called Armadillos, because they were so clever.

So that; all right, Best Beloved. Do you see?

     I’VE never sailed the Amazon,
       I’ve never reached Brazil;
     But the Don and Magdelana,
       They can go there when they will!

             Yes, weekly from Southampton,
             Great steamers, white and gold,
             Go rolling down to Rio
             (Roll down--roll down to Rio!)
             And I’d like to roll to Rio
             Some day before I’m old!

     I’ve never seen a Jaguar,
       Nor yet an Armadill
     O dilloing in his armour,
       And I s’pose I never will,

             Unless I go to Rio
             These wonders to behold--
             Roll down--roll down to Rio--
             Roll really down to Rio!
             Oh, I’d love to roll to Rio
             Some day before I’m old!




HOW THE FIRST LETTER WAS WRITTEN

ONCE upon a most early time was a Neolithic man. He was not a Jute or an
Angle, or even a Dravidian, which he might well have been, Best Beloved,
but never mind why. He was a Primitive, and he lived cavily in a Cave,
and he wore very few clothes, and he couldn’t read and he couldn’t write
and he didn’t want to, and except when he was hungry he was
quite happy. His name was Tegumai Bopsulai, and that means,
‘Man-who-does-not-put-his-foot-forward-in-a-hurry’; but we, O Best
Beloved, will call him Tegumai, for short. And his wife’s name
was Teshumai Tewindrow, and that means,
‘Lady-who-asks-a-very-many-questions’; but we, O Best Beloved, will
call her Teshumai, for short. And his little girl-daughter’s name
was Taffimai Metallumai, and that means,
‘Small-person-without-any-manners-who-ought-to-be-spanked’; but I’m
going to call her Taffy. And she was Tegumai Bopsulai’s Best Beloved and
her own Mummy’s Best Beloved, and she was not spanked half as much as
was good for her; and they were all three very happy. As soon as
Taffy could run about she went everywhere with her Daddy Tegumai, and
sometimes they would not come home to the Cave till they were hungry,
and then Teshumai Tewindrow would say, ‘Where in the world have you two
been to, to get so shocking dirty? Really, my Tegumai, you’re no better
than my Taffy.’

Now attend and listen!

One day Tegumai Bopsulai went down through the beaver-swamp to the Wagai
river to spear carp-fish for dinner, and Taffy went too. Tegumai’s spear
was made of wood with shark’s teeth at the end, and before he had caught
any fish at all he accidentally broke it clean across by jabbing it down
too hard on the bottom of the river. They were miles and miles from home
(of course they had their lunch with them in a little bag), and Tegumai
had forgotten to bring any extra spears.

‘Here’s a pretty kettle of fish!’ said Tegumai. ‘It will take me half
the day to mend this.’

‘There’s your big black spear at home,’ said Taffy. ‘Let me run back to
the Cave and ask Mummy to give it me.’

‘It’s too far for your little fat legs,’ said Tegumai. ‘Besides, you
might fall into the beaver-swamp and be drowned. We must make the best
of a bad job.’ He sat down and took out a little leather mendy-bag, full
of reindeer-sinews and strips of leather, and lumps of bee’s-wax and
resin, and began to mend the spear.

Taffy sat down too, with her toes in the water and her chin in her
hand, and thought very hard. Then she said--‘I say, Daddy, it’s an awful
nuisance that you and I don’t know how to write, isn’t it? If we did we
could send a message for the new spear.’

‘Taffy,’ said Tegumai, ‘how often have I told you not to use slang?
“Awful” isn’t a pretty word, but it could be a convenience, now you
mention it, if we could write home.’

Just then a Stranger-man came along the river, but he belonged to a
far tribe, the Tewaras, and he did not understand one word of Tegumai’s
language. He stood on the bank and smiled at Taffy, because he had
a little girl-daughter Of his own at home. Tegumai drew a hank of
deer-sinews from his mendy-bag and began to mend his spear.

‘Come here, said Taffy. ‘Do you know where my Mummy lives?’ And the
Stranger-man said ‘Um!’ being, as you know, a Tewara.

‘Silly!’ said Taffy, and she stamped her foot, because she saw a shoal
of very big carp going up the river just when her Daddy couldn’t use his
spear.

‘Don’t bother grown-ups,’ said Tegumai, so busy with his spear-mending
that he did not turn round.

‘I aren’t, said Taffy. ‘I only want him to do what I want him to do, and
he won’t understand.’

‘Then don’t bother me, said Tegumai, and he went on pulling and
straining at the deer-sinews with his mouth full of loose ends. The
Stranger-man--a genuine Tewara he was--sat down on the grass, and Taffy
showed him what her Daddy was doing. The Stranger-man thought, this is a
very wonderful child. She stamps her foot at me and she makes faces. She
must be the daughter of that noble Chief who is so great that he won’t
take any notice of me.’ So he smiled more politely than ever.

‘Now,’ said Taffy, ‘I want you to go to my Mummy, because your legs are
longer than mine, and you won’t fall into the beaver-swamp, and ask for
Daddy’s other spear--the one with the black handle that hangs over our
fireplace.’

The Stranger-man (and he was a Tewara) thought, ‘This is a very, very
wonderful child. She waves her arms and she shouts at me, but I don’t
understand a word of what she says. But if I don’t do what she wants, I
greatly fear that that haughty Chief, Man-who-turns-his-back-on-callers,
will be angry.’ He got up and twisted a big flat piece of bark off a
birch-tree and gave it to Taffy. He did this, Best Beloved, to show that
his heart was as white as the birch-bark and that he meant no harm; but
Taffy didn’t quite understand.

‘Oh!’ said she. ‘Now I see! You want my Mummy’s living-address? Of
course I can’t write, but I can draw pictures if I’ve anything sharp to
scratch with. Please lend me the shark’s tooth off your necklace.’

The Stranger-man (and he was a Tewara) didn’t say anything, So Taffy
put up her little hand and pulled at the beautiful bead and seed and
shark-tooth necklace round his neck.

The Stranger-man (and he was a Tewara) thought, ‘This is a very, very,
very wonderful child. The shark’s tooth on my necklace is a magic
shark’s tooth, and I was always told that if anybody touched it without
my leave they would immediately swell up or burst, but this
child doesn’t swell up or burst, and that important Chief,
Man-who-attends-strictly-to-his-business, who has not yet taken any
notice of me at all, doesn’t seem to be afraid that she will swell up or
burst. I had better be more polite.’

So he gave Taffy the shark’s tooth, and she lay down flat on her tummy
with her legs in the air, like some people on the drawing-room floor
when they want to draw pictures, and she said, ‘Now I’ll draw you some
beautiful pictures! You can look over my shoulder, but you mustn’t
joggle. First I’ll draw Daddy fishing. It isn’t very like him; but Mummy
will know, because I’ve drawn his spear all broken. Well, now I’ll draw
the other spear that he wants, the black-handled spear. It looks as if
it was sticking in Daddy’s back, but that’s because the shark’s tooth
slipped and this piece of bark isn’t big enough. That’s the spear I want
you to fetch; so I’ll draw a picture of me myself ‘splaining to you. My
hair doesn’t stand up like I’ve drawn, but it’s easier to draw that way.
Now I’ll draw you. I think you’re very nice really, but I can’t make you
pretty in the picture, so you mustn’t be ‘fended. Are you ‘fended?’

The Stranger-man (and he was a Tewara) smiled. He thought, ‘There must
be a big battle going to be fought somewhere, and this extraordinary
child, who takes my magic shark’s tooth but who does not swell up or
burst, is telling me to call all the great Chief’s tribe to help him. He
is a great Chief, or he would have noticed me.

‘Look,’ said Taffy, drawing very hard and rather scratchily, ‘now I’ve
drawn you, and I’ve put the spear that Daddy wants into your hand, just
to remind you that you’re to bring it. Now I’ll show you how to find my
Mummy’s living-address. You go along till you come to two trees (those
are trees), and then you go over a hill (that’s a hill), and then you
come into a beaver-swamp all full of beavers. I haven’t put in all the
beavers, because I can’t draw beavers, but I’ve drawn their heads, and
that’s all you’ll see of them when you cross the swamp. Mind you don’t
fall in! Then our Cave is just beyond the beaver-swamp. It isn’t as high
as the hills really, but I can’t draw things very small. That’s my Mummy
outside. She is beautiful. She is the most beautifullest Mummy there
ever was, but she won’t be ‘fended when she sees I’ve drawn her so
plain. She’ll be pleased of me because I can draw. Now, in case you
forget, I’ve drawn the spear that Daddy wants outside our Cave. It’s
inside really, but you show the picture to my Mummy and she’ll give it
you. I’ve made her holding up her hands, because I know she’ll be so
pleased to see you. Isn’t it a beautiful picture? And do you quite
understand, or shall I ‘splain again?’

The Stranger-man (and he was a Tewara) looked at the picture and nodded
very hard. He said to himself,’ If I do not fetch this great Chief’s
tribe to help him, he will be slain by his enemies who are coming up on
all sides with spears. Now I see why the great Chief pretended not to
notice me! He feared that his enemies were hiding in the bushes and
would see him. Therefore he turned to me his back, and let the wise and
wonderful child draw the terrible picture showing me his difficulties.
I will away and get help for him from his tribe.’ He did not even ask
Taffy the road, but raced off into the bushes like the wind, with the
birch-bark in his hand, and Taffy sat down most pleased.

Now this is the picture that Taffy had drawn for him!

‘What have you been doing, Taffy?’ said Tegumai. He had mended his spear
and was carefully waving it to and fro.

‘It’s a little berangement of my own, Daddy dear,’ said Taffy. ‘If you
won’t ask me questions, you’ll know all about it in a little time, and
you’ll be surprised. You don’t know how surprised you’ll be, Daddy!
Promise you’ll be surprised.’

‘Very well,’ said Tegumai, and went on fishing.

The Stranger-man--did you know he was a Tewara?--hurried away with the
picture and ran for some miles, till quite by accident he found Teshumai
Tewindrow at the door of her Cave, talking to some other Neolithic
ladies who had come in to a Primitive lunch. Taffy was very like
Teshumai, especially about the upper part of the face and the eyes,
so the Stranger-man--always a pure Tewara--smiled politely and handed
Teshumai the birch-bark. He had run hard, so that he panted, and his
legs were scratched with brambles, but he still tried to be polite.

As soon as Teshumai saw the picture she screamed like anything and flew
at the Stranger-man. The other Neolithic ladies at once knocked him down
and sat on him in a long line of six, while Teshumai pulled his hair.

‘It’s as plain as the nose on this Stranger-man’s face,’ she said. ‘He
has stuck my Tegumai all full of spears, and frightened poor Taffy so
that her hair stands all on end; and not content with that, he brings
me a horrid picture of how it was done. Look!’ She showed the picture to
all the Neolithic ladies sitting patiently on the Stranger-man. ‘Here is
my Tegumai with his arm broken; here is a spear sticking into his back;
here is a man with a spear ready to throw; here is another man throwing
a spear from a Cave, and here are a whole pack of people’ (they were
Taffy’s beavers really, but they did look rather like people) ‘coming up
behind Tegumai. Isn’t it shocking!’

‘Most shocking!’ said the Neolithic ladies, and they filled the
Stranger-man’s hair with mud (at which he was surprised), and they beat
upon the Reverberating Tribal Drums, and called together all the chiefs
of the Tribe of Tegumai, with their Hetmans and Dolmans, all Neguses,
Woons, and Akhoonds of the organisation, in addition to the Warlocks,
Angekoks, Juju-men, Bonzes, and the rest, who decided that before they
chopped the Stranger-man’s head off he should instantly lead them down
to the river and show them where he had hidden poor Taffy.

By this time the Stranger-man (in spite of being a Tewara) was really
annoyed. They had filled his hair quite solid with mud; they had rolled
him up and down on knobby pebbles; they had sat upon him in a long
line of six; they had thumped him and bumped him till he could hardly
breathe; and though he did not understand their language, he was almost
sure that the names the Neolithic ladies called him were not ladylike.
However, he said nothing till all the Tribe of Tegumai were assembled,
and then he led them back to the bank of the Wagai river, and there they
found Taffy making daisy-chains, and Tegumai carefully spearing small
carp with his mended spear.

‘Well, you have been quick!’ said Taffy. ‘But why did you bring so many
people? Daddy dear, this is my surprise. Are you surprised, Daddy?’

‘Very,’ said Tegumai; ‘but it has ruined all my fishing for the day.
Why, the whole dear, kind, nice, clean, quiet Tribe is here, Taffy.’

And so they were. First of all walked Teshumai Tewindrow and the
Neolithic ladies, tightly holding on to the Stranger-man, whose hair was
full of mud (although he was a Tewara). Behind them came the Head Chief,
the Vice-Chief, the Deputy and Assistant Chiefs (all armed to the upper
teeth), the Hetmans and Heads of Hundreds, Platoffs with their Platoons,
and Dolmans with their Detachments; Woons, Neguses, and Akhoonds ranking
in the rear (still armed to the teeth). Behind them was the Tribe in
hierarchical order, from owners of four caves (one for each season), a
private reindeer-run, and two salmon-leaps, to feudal and prognathous
Villeins, semi-entitled to half a bearskin of winter nights, seven yards
from the fire, and adscript serfs, holding the reversion of a scraped
marrow-bone under heriot (Aren’t those beautiful words, Best Beloved?).
They were all there, prancing and shouting, and they frightened every
fish for twenty miles, and Tegumai thanked them in a fluid Neolithic
oration.

Then Teshumai Tewindrow ran down and kissed and hugged Taffy very much
indeed; but the Head Chief of the Tribe of Tegumai took Tegumai by the
top-knot feathers and shook him severely.

‘Explain! Explain! Explain!’ cried all the Tribe of Tegumai.

‘Goodness’ sakes alive!’ said Tegumai. ‘Let go of my top-knot. Can’t
a man break his carp-spear without the whole countryside descending on
him? You’re a very interfering people.’

‘I don’t believe you’ve brought my Daddy’s black-handled spear after
all,’ said Taffy. ‘And what are you doing to my nice Stranger-man?’

They were thumping him by twos and threes and tens till his eyes turned
round and round. He could only gasp and point at Taffy.

‘Where are the bad people who speared you, my darling?’ said Teshumai
Tewindrow.

‘There weren’t any,’ said Tegumai. ‘My only visitor this morning was the
poor fellow that you are trying to choke. Aren’t you well, or are you
ill, O Tribe of Tegumai?’

‘He came with a horrible picture,’ said the Head Chief,--‘a picture that
showed you were full of spears.’

‘Er-um-Pr’aps I’d better ‘splain that I gave him that picture,’ said
Taffy, but she did not feel quite comfy.

‘You!’ said the Tribe of Tegumai all together.
‘Small-person-with-no-manners-who-ought-to-be-spanked! You?’

‘Taffy dear, I’m afraid we’re in for a little trouble,’ said her Daddy,
and put his arm round her, so she didn’t care.

‘Explain! Explain! Explain!’ said the Head Chief of the Tribe of
Tegumai, and he hopped on one foot.

‘I wanted the Stranger-man to fetch Daddy’s spear, so I drawded it,’
said Taffy. ‘There wasn’t lots of spears. There was only one spear. I
drawded it three times to make sure. I couldn’t help it looking as if it
stuck into Daddy’s head--there wasn’t room on the birch-bark; and those
things that Mummy called bad people are my beavers. I drawded them to
show him the way through the swamp; and I drawded Mummy at the mouth of
the Cave looking pleased because he is a nice Stranger-man, and I think
you are just the stupidest people in the world,’ said Taffy. ‘He is a
very nice man. Why have you filled his hair with mud? Wash him!’

Nobody said anything at all for a longtime, till the Head Chief laughed;
then the Stranger-man (who was at least a Tewara) laughed; then Tegumai
laughed till he fell down flat on the bank; then all the Tribe laughed
more and worse and louder. The only people who did not laugh were
Teshumai Tewindrow and all the Neolithic ladies. They were very polite
to all their husbands, and said ‘Idiot!’ ever so often.

Then the Head Chief of the Tribe of Tegumai cried and said and sang, ‘O
Small-person-with-out-any-manners-who-ought-to-be-spanked, you’ve hit
upon a great invention!’

‘I didn’t intend to; I only wanted Daddy’s black-handled spear,’ said
Taffy.

‘Never mind. It is a great invention, and some day men will call it
writing. At present it is only pictures, and, as we have seen to-day,
pictures are not always properly understood. But a time will come, O
Babe of Tegumai, when we shall make letters--all twenty-six of ‘em,--and
when we shall be able to read as well as to write, and then we shall
always say exactly what we mean without any mistakes. Let the Neolithic
ladies wash the mud out of the stranger’s hair.’

‘I shall be glad of that,’ said Taffy, ‘because, after all, though
you’ve brought every single other spear in the Tribe of Tegumai, you’ve
forgotten my Daddy’s black-handled spear.’

Then the Head Chief cried and said and sang, ‘Taffy dear, the next time
you write a picture-letter, you’d better send a man who can talk our
language with it, to explain what it means. I don’t mind it myself,
because I am a Head Chief, but it’s very bad for the rest of the Tribe
of Tegumai, and, as you can see, it surprises the stranger.’

Then they adopted the Stranger-man (a genuine Tewara of Tewar) into the
Tribe of Tegumai, because he was a gentleman and did not make a fuss
about the mud that the Neolithic ladies had put into his hair. But
from that day to this (and I suppose it is all Taffy’s fault), very few
little girls have ever liked learning to read or write. Most of them
prefer to draw pictures and play about with their Daddies--just like
Taffy.


     THERE runs a road by Merrow Down--
       A grassy track to-day it is
     An hour out of Guildford town,
       Above the river Wey it is.

     Here, when they heard the horse-bells ring,
       The ancient Britons dressed and rode
     To watch the dark Phoenicians bring
       Their goods along the Western Road.

     And here, or hereabouts, they met
       To hold their racial talks and such--
     To barter beads for Whitby jet,
       And tin for gay shell torques and such.

     But long and long before that time
       (When bison used to roam on it)
     Did Taffy and her Daddy climb
       That down, and had their home on it.

     Then beavers built in Broadstone brook
       And made a swamp where Bramley stands:
     And bears from Shere would come and look
       For Taffimai where Shamley stands.

     The Wey, that Taffy called Wagai,
       Was more than six times bigger then;
     And all the Tribe of Tegumai
       They cut a noble figure then!




HOW THE ALPHABET WAS MADE

THE week after Taffimai Metallumai (we will still call her Taffy,
Best Beloved) made that little mistake about her Daddy’s spear and the
Stranger-man and the picture-letter and all, she went carp-fishing again
with her Daddy. Her Mummy wanted her to stay at home and help hang up
hides to dry on the big drying-poles outside their Neolithic Cave,
but Taffy slipped away down to her Daddy quite early, and they fished.
Presently she began to giggle, and her Daddy said, ‘Don’t be silly,
child.’

‘But wasn’t it inciting!’ said Taffy. ‘Don’t you remember how the Head
Chief puffed out his cheeks, and how funny the nice Stranger-man looked
with the mud in his hair?’

‘Well do I,’ said Tegumai. ‘I had to pay two deerskins--soft ones with
fringes--to the Stranger-man for the things we did to him.’

‘We didn’t do anything,’ said Taffy. ‘It was Mummy and the other
Neolithic ladies--and the mud.’

‘We won’t talk about that,’ said her Daddy, ‘Let’s have lunch.’

Taffy took a marrow-bone and sat mousy-quiet for ten whole minutes,
while her Daddy scratched on pieces of birch-bark with a shark’s tooth.
Then she said, ‘Daddy, I’ve thinked of a secret surprise. You make a
noise--any sort of noise.’

‘Ah!’ said Tegumai. ‘Will that do to begin with?’

‘Yes,’ said Taffy. ‘You look just like a carp-fish with its mouth open.
Say it again, please.’

‘Ah! ah! ah!’ said her Daddy. ‘Don’t be rude, my daughter.’

‘I’m not meaning rude, really and truly,’ said Taffy. ‘It’s part of my
secret-surprise-think. Do say ah, Daddy, and keep your mouth open at
the end, and lend me that tooth. I’m going to draw a carp-fish’s mouth
wide-open.’

‘What for?’ said her Daddy.

‘Don’t you see?’ said Taffy, scratching away on the bark. ‘That will be
our little secret s’prise. When I draw a carp-fish with his mouth open
in the smoke at the back of our Cave--if Mummy doesn’t mind--it will
remind you of that ah-noise. Then we can play that it was me jumped
out of the dark and s’prised you with that noise--same as I did in the
beaver-swamp last winter.’

‘Really?’ said her Daddy, in the voice that grown-ups use when they are
truly attending. ‘Go on, Taffy.’

‘Oh bother!’ she said. ‘I can’t draw all of a carp-fish, but I can draw
something that means a carp-fish’s mouth. Don’t you know how they stand
on their heads rooting in the mud? Well, here’s a pretence carp-fish (we
can play that the rest of him is drawn). Here’s just his mouth, and that
means ah.’ And she drew this. (1.)

‘That’s not bad,’ said Tegumai, and scratched on his own piece of bark
for himself; but you’ve forgotten the feeler that hangs across his
mouth.’

‘But I can’t draw, Daddy.’

‘You needn’t draw anything of him except just the opening of his mouth
and the feeler across. Then we’ll know he’s a carp-fish, ‘cause the
perches and trouts haven’t got feelers. Look here, Taffy.’ And he drew
this. (2.)

‘Now I’ll copy it.’ said Taffy. ‘Will you understand this when you see
it?’

‘Perfectly,’ said her Daddy.

And she drew this. (3.) ‘And I’ll be quite as s’prised when I see it
anywhere, as if you had jumped out from behind a tree and said ‘“Ah!”’

‘Now, make another noise,’ said Taffy, very proud.

‘Yah!’ said her Daddy, very loud.

‘H’m,’ said Taffy. ‘That’s a mixy noise. The end part is
ah-carp-fish-mouth; but what can we do about the front part? Yer-yer-yer
and ah! Ya!’

‘It’s very like the carp-fish-mouth noise. Let’s draw another bit of the
carp-fish and join ‘em,’ said her Daddy. He was quite incited too.

‘No. If they’re joined, I’ll forget. Draw it separate. Draw his tail.
If he’s standing on his head the tail will come first. ‘Sides, I think I
can draw tails easiest,’ said Taffy.

‘A good notion,’ said Tegumai. ‘Here’s a carp-fish tail for the
yer-noise.’ And he drew this. (4.)

‘I’ll try now,’ said Taffy. ‘’Member I can’t draw like you, Daddy. Will
it do if I just draw the split part of the tail, and the sticky-down
line for where it joins?’ And she drew this. (5.)

Her Daddy nodded, and his eyes were shiny bright with ‘citement.

‘That’s beautiful,’ she said. ‘Now make another noise, Daddy.’

‘Oh!’ said her Daddy, very loud.

‘That’s quite easy,’ said Taffy. ‘You make your mouth all around like an
egg or a stone. So an egg or a stone will do for that.’

‘You can’t always find eggs or stones. We’ll have to scratch a round
something like one.’ And he drew this. (6.)

‘My gracious!’ said Taffy, ‘what a lot of noise-pictures we’ve
made,--carp-mouth, carp-tail, and egg! Now, make another noise, Daddy.’

‘Ssh!’ said her Daddy, and frowned to himself, but Taffy was too incited
to notice.

‘That’s quite easy,’ she said, scratching on the bark.

‘Eh, what?’ said her Daddy. ‘I meant I was thinking, and didn’t want to
be disturbed.’

‘It’s a noise just the same. It’s the noise a snake makes, Daddy,
when it is thinking and doesn’t want to be disturbed. Let’s make the
ssh-noise a snake. Will this do?’ And she drew this. (7.)

‘There,’ she said. ‘That’s another s’prise-secret. When you draw a
hissy-snake by the door of your little back-cave where you mend
the spears, I’ll know you’re thinking hard; and I’ll come in most
mousy-quiet. And if you draw it on a tree by the river when you are
fishing, I’ll know you want me to walk most most mousy-quiet, so as not
to shake the banks.’

‘Perfectly true,’ said Tegumai. And there’s more in this game than you
think. Taffy, dear, I’ve a notion that your Daddy’s daughter has hit
upon the finest thing that there ever was since the Tribe of Tegumai
took to using shark’s teeth instead of flints for their spear-heads. I
believe we’ve found out the big secret of the world.’

‘Why?’ said Taffy, and her eyes shone too with incitement.

‘I’ll show,’ said her Daddy. ‘What’s water in the Tegumai language?’

‘Ya, of course, and it means river too--like Wagai-ya--the Wagai river.’

‘What is bad water that gives you fever if you drink it--black
water--swamp-water?’

‘Yo, of course.’

‘Now look,’ said her Daddy. ‘S’pose you saw this scratched by the side
of a pool in the beaver-swamp?’ And he drew this. (8.)

‘Carp-tail and round egg. Two noises mixed! Yo, bad water,’ said Taffy.
‘’Course I wouldn’t drink that water because I’d know you said it was
bad.’

‘But I needn’t be near the water at all. I might be miles away, hunting,
and still--’

‘And still it would be just the same as if you stood there and said,
“G’way, Taffy, or you’ll get fever.” All that in a carp-fish-tail and
a round egg! O Daddy, we must tell Mummy, quick!’ and Taffy danced all
round him.

‘Not yet,’ said Tegumai; ‘not till we’ve gone a little further. Let’s
see. Yo is bad water, but So is food cooked on the fire, isn’t it?’ And
he drew this. (9.)

‘Yes. Snake and egg,’ said Taffy ‘So that means dinner’s ready. If you
saw that scratched on a tree you’d know it was time to come to the Cave.
So’d I.’

‘My Winkie!’ said Tegumai. ‘That’s true too. But wait a minute. I see
a difficulty. SO means “come and have dinner,” but sho means the
drying-poles where we hang our hides.’

‘Horrid old drying-poles!’ said Taffy. ‘I hate helping to hang heavy,
hot, hairy hides on them. If you drew the snake and egg, and I thought
it meant dinner, and I came in from the wood and found that it meant I
was to help Mummy hang the two hides on the drying-poles, what would I
do?’

‘You’d be cross. So’d Mummy. We must make a new picture for sho. We must
draw a spotty snake that hisses sh-sh, and we’ll play that the plain
snake only hisses ssss.’

‘I couldn’t be sure how to put in the spots,’ said Taffy. ‘And p’raps
if you were in a hurry you might leave them out, and I’d think it was
so when it was sho, and then Mummy would catch me just the same. No! I
think we’d better draw a picture of the horrid high drying-poles their
very selves, and make quite sure. I’ll put them in just after the
hissy-snake. Look!’ And she drew this. (10.)

‘P’raps that’s safest. It’s very like our drying-poles, anyhow,’
said her Daddy, laughing. ‘Now I’ll make a new noise with a snake and
drying-pole sound in it. I’ll say shi. That’s Tegumai for spear, Taffy.’
And he laughed.

‘Don’t make fun of me,’ said Taffy, as she thought of her picture-letter
and the mud in the Stranger-man’s hair. ‘You draw it, Daddy.’

‘We won’t have beavers or hills this time, eh?’ said her Daddy, ‘I’ll
just draw a straight line for my spear.’ and he drew this. (11.)

‘Even Mummy couldn’t mistake that for me being killed.’

‘Please don’t, Daddy. It makes me uncomfy. Do some more noises. We’re
getting on beautifully.’

‘Er-hm!’ said Tegumai, looking up. ‘We’ll say shu. That means sky.’

Taffy drew the snake and the drying-pole. Then she stopped. ‘We must
make a new picture for that end sound, mustn’t we?’

‘Shu-shu-u-u-u!’ said her Daddy. ‘Why, it’s just like the
round-egg-sound made thin.’

‘Then s’pose we draw a thin round egg, and pretend it’s a frog that
hasn’t eaten anything for years.’

‘N-no,’ said her Daddy. ‘If we drew that in a hurry we might mistake it
for the round egg itself. Shu-shu-shu! ‘I tell you what we’ll do. We’ll
open a little hole at the end of the round egg to show how the O-noise
runs out all thin, ooo-oo-oo. Like this.’ And he drew this. (12.)

‘Oh, that’s lovely! Much better than a thin frog. Go on,’ said Taffy,
using her shark’s tooth. Her Daddy went on drawing, and his hand shook
with incitement. He went on till he had drawn this. (13.)

‘Don’t look up, Taffy,’ he said. ‘Try if you can make out what that
means in the Tegumai language. If you can, we’ve found the Secret.’

‘Snake--pole--broken--egg--carp--tail and carp-mouth,’ said Taffy.
‘Shu-ya. Sky-water (rain).’ Just then a drop fell on her hand, for the
day had clouded over. ‘Why, Daddy, it’s raining. Was that what you meant
to tell me?’

‘Of course,’ said her Daddy. ‘And I told it you without saying a word,
didn’t I?’

‘Well, I think I would have known it in a minute, but that raindrop made
me quite sure. I’ll always remember now. Shu-ya means rain, or “it is
going to rain.” Why, Daddy!’ She got up and danced round him. ‘S’pose
you went out before I was awake, and drawed shu-ya in the smoke on the
wall, I’d know it was going to rain and I’d take my beaver-skin hood.
Wouldn’t Mummy be surprised?’

Tegumai got up and danced. (Daddies didn’t mind doing those things in
those days.) ‘More than that! More than that!’ he said. ‘S’pose I wanted
to tell you it wasn’t going to rain much and you must come down to the
river, what would we draw? Say the words in Tegumai-talk first.’

‘Shu-ya-las, ya maru. (Sky-water ending. River come to.) what a lot of
new sounds! I don’t see how we can draw them.’

‘But I do--but I do!’ said Tegumai. ‘Just attend a minute, Taffy, and
we won’t do any more to-day. We’ve got shu-ya all right, haven’t we? But
this las is a teaser. La-la-la’ and he waved his shark-tooth.

‘There’s the hissy-snake at the end and the carp-mouth before the
snake--as-as-as. We only want la-la,’ said Taffy.

‘I know it, but we have to make la-la. And we’re the first people in all
the world who’ve ever tried to do it, Taffimai!’

‘Well,’ said Taffy, yawning, for she was rather tired. ‘Las means
breaking or finishing as well as ending, doesn’t it?’

‘So it does,’ said Tegumai. ‘To-las means that there’s no water in the
tank for Mummy to cook with--just when I’m going hunting, too.’

‘And shi-las means that your spear is broken. If I’d only thought of
that instead of drawing silly beaver pictures for the Stranger!’

‘La! La! La!’ said Tegumai, waiving his stick and frowning. ‘Oh bother!’

‘I could have drawn shi quite easily,’ Taffy went on. ‘Then I’d have
drawn your spear all broken--this way!’ And she drew. (14.)

‘The very thing,’ said Tegumai. ‘That’s la all over. It isn’t like any
of the other marks either.’ And he drew this. (15.)

‘Now for ya. Oh, we’ve done that before. Now for maru. Mum-mum-mum. Mum
shuts one’s mouth up, doesn’t it? We’ll draw a shut mouth like this.’
And he drew. (16.)

‘Then the carp-mouth open. That makes Ma-ma-ma! But what about this
rrrrr-thing, Taffy?’

‘It sounds all rough and edgy, like your shark-tooth saw when you’re
cutting out a plank for the canoe,’ said Taffy.

‘You mean all sharp at the edges, like this?’ said Tegumai. And he drew.
(17.)

‘’Xactly,’ said Taffy. ‘But we don’t want all those teeth: only put
two.’

‘I’ll only put in one,’ said Tegumai. ‘If this game of ours is going
to be what I think it will, the easier we make our sound-pictures the
better for everybody.’ And he drew. (18.)

‘Now, we’ve got it,’ said Tegumai, standing on one leg. ‘I’ll draw ‘em
all in a string like fish.’

‘Hadn’t we better put a little bit of stick or something between each
word, so’s they won’t rub up against each other and jostle, same as if
they were carps?’

‘Oh, I’ll leave a space for that,’ said her Daddy. And very incitedly he
drew them all without stopping, on a big new bit of birch-bark. (19.)

‘Shu-ya-las ya-maru,’ said Taffy, reading it out sound by sound.


‘That’s enough for to-day,’ said Tegumai. ‘Besides, you’re getting
tired, Taffy. Never mind, dear. We’ll finish it all to-morrow, and then
we’ll be remembered for years and years after the biggest trees you can
see are all chopped up for firewood.’

So they went home, and all that evening Tegumai sat on one side of the
fire and Taffy on the other, drawing ya’s and yo’s and shu’s and shi’s
in the smoke on the wall and giggling together till her Mummy said,
‘Really, Tegumai, you’re worse than my Taffy.’

‘Please don’t mind,’ said Taffy. ‘It’s only our secret-s’prise, Mummy
dear, and we’ll tell you all about it the very minute it’s done; but
please don’t ask me what it is now, or else I’ll have to tell.’

So her Mummy most carefully didn’t; and bright and early next morning
Tegumai went down to the river to think about new sound pictures,
and when Taffy got up she saw Ya-las (water is ending or running out)
chalked on the side of the big stone water-tank, outside the Cave.

‘Um,’ said Taffy. ‘These picture-sounds are rather a bother! Daddy’s
just as good as come here himself and told me to get more water for
Mummy to cook with.’ She went to the spring at the back of the house and
filled the tank from a bark bucket, and then she ran down to the river
and pulled her Daddy’s left ear--the one that belonged to her to pull
when she was good.

‘Now come along and we’ll draw all the left-over sound-pictures,’ said
her Daddy, and they had a most inciting day of it, and a beautiful lunch
in the middle, and two games of romps. When they came to T, Taffy said
that as her name, and her Daddy’s, and her Mummy’s all began with that
sound, they should draw a sort of family group of themselves holding
hands. That was all very well to draw once or twice; but when it came to
drawing it six or seven times, Taffy and Tegumai drew it scratchier and
scratchier, till at last the T-sound was only a thin long Tegumai with
his arms out to hold Taffy and Teshumai. You can see from these three
pictures partly how it happened. (20, 21, 22.)

Many of the other pictures were much too beautiful to begin with,
especially before lunch, but as they were drawn over and over again on
birch-bark, they became plainer and easier, till at last even Tegumai
said he could find no fault with them. They turned the hissy-snake the
other way round for the Z-sound, to show it was hissing backwards in a
soft and gentle way (23); and they just made a twiddle for E, because
it came into the pictures so often (24); and they drew pictures of the
sacred Beaver of the Tegumais for the B-sound (25, 26, 27, 28); and
because it was a nasty, nosy noise, they just drew noses for the
N-sound, till they were tired (29); and they drew a picture of the big
lake-pike’s mouth for the greedy Ga-sound (30); and they drew the pike’s
mouth again with a spear behind it for the scratchy, hurty Ka-sound
(31); and they drew pictures of a little bit of the winding Wagai river
for the nice windy-windy Wa-sound (32, 33); and so on and so forth and
so following till they had done and drawn all the sound-pictures that
they wanted, and there was the Alphabet, all complete.

And after thousands and thousands and thousands of years, and after
Hieroglyphics and Demotics, and Nilotics, and Cryptics, and Cufics, and
Runics, and Dorics, and Ionics, and all sorts of other ricks and
tricks (because the Woons, and the Neguses, and the Akhoonds, and the
Repositories of Tradition would never leave a good thing alone when they
saw it), the fine old easy, understandable Alphabet--A, B, C, D, E,
and the rest of ‘em--got back into its proper shape again for all Best
Beloveds to learn when they are old enough.

But I remember Tegumai Bopsulai, and Taffimai Metallumai and Teshumai
Tewindrow, her dear Mummy, and all the days gone by. And it was so--just
so--a little time ago--on the banks of the big Wagai!

     OF all the Tribe of Tegumai
       Who cut that figure, none remain,--
     On Merrow Down the cuckoos cry
       The silence and the sun remain.

     But as the faithful years return
       And hearts unwounded sing again,
     Comes Taffy dancing through the fern
       To lead the Surrey spring again.

     Her brows are bound with bracken-fronds,
       And golden elf-locks fly above;
     Her eyes are bright as diamonds
       And bluer than the skies above.

     In mocassins and deer-skin cloak,
       Unfearing, free and fair she flits,
     And lights her little damp-wood smoke
       To show her Daddy where she flits.

     For far--oh, very far behind,
       So far she cannot call to him,
     Comes Tegumai alone to find
       The daughter that was all to him.




THE CRAB THAT PLAYED WITH THE SEA

BEFORE the High and Far-Off Times, O my Best Beloved, came the Time of
the Very Beginnings; and that was in the days when the Eldest Magician
was getting Things ready. First he got the Earth ready; then he got the
Sea ready; and then he told all the Animals that they could come out and
play. And the Animals said, ‘O Eldest Magician, what shall we play
at?’ and he said, ‘I will show you. He took the
Elephant--All-the-Elephant-there-was--and said, ‘Play at being
an Elephant,’ and All-the-Elephant-there-was played. He took the
Beaver--All-the-Beaver-there-was and said, ‘Play at being a Beaver,’
and All-the Beaver-there-was played. He took the Cow--All-the
Cow-there-was--and said, ‘Play at being a Cow,’ and
All-the-Cow-there-was played. He took the Turtle--All-the-Turtle
there-was and said, ‘Play at being a Turtle,’ and
All-the-Turtle-there-was played. One by one he took all the beasts and
birds and fishes and told them what to play at.

But towards evening, when people and things grow restless and tired,
there came up the Man (With his own little girl-daughter?)--Yes, with
his own best beloved little girl-daughter sitting upon his shoulder, and
he said, ‘What is this play, Eldest Magician?’ And the Eldest Magician
said, ‘Ho, Son of Adam, this is the play of the Very Beginning; but you
are too wise for this play.’ And the Man saluted and said, ‘Yes, I am
too wise for this play; but see that you make all the Animals obedient
to me.’

Now, while the two were talking together, Pau Amma the Crab, who was
next in the game, scuttled off sideways and stepped into the sea, saying
to himself, ‘I will play my play alone in the deep waters, and I will
never be obedient to this son of Adam.’ Nobody saw him go away except
the little girl-daughter where she leaned on the Man’s shoulder. And the
play went on till there were no more Animals left without orders; and
the Eldest Magician wiped the fine dust off his hands and walked about
the world to see how the Animals were playing.

He went North, Best Beloved, and he found All-the-Elephant-there-was
digging with his tusks and stamping with his feet in the nice new clean
earth that had been made ready for him.

‘Kun?’ said All-the-Elephant-there-was, meaning, ‘Is this right?’

‘Payah kun,’ said the Eldest Magician, meaning, ‘That is quite
right’; and he breathed upon the great rocks and lumps of earth that
All-the-Elephant-there-was had thrown up, and they became the great
Himalayan Mountains, and you can look them out on the map.

He went East, and he found All-the-Cow there-was feeding in the field
that had been made ready for her, and she licked her tongue round a
whole forest at a time, and swallowed it and sat down to chew her cud.

‘Kun?’ said All-the-Cow-there-was.

‘Payah kun,’ said the Eldest Magician; and he breathed upon the bare
patch where she had eaten, and upon the place where she had sat down,
and one became the great Indian Desert, and the other became the Desert
of Sahara, and you can look them out on the map.

He went West, and he found All-the-Beaver-there-was making a beaver-dam
across the mouths of broad rivers that had been got ready for him.

‘Kun?’ said All-the-Beaver-there-was.

‘Payah kun,’ said the Eldest Magician; and he breathed upon the fallen
trees and the still water, and they became the Everglades in Florida,
and you may look them out on the map.

Then he went South and found All-the-Turtle-there-was scratching with
his flippers in the sand that had been got ready for him, and the sand
and the rocks whirled through the air and fell far off into the sea.

‘Kun?’ said All-the-Turtle-there-was.

‘Payah kun,’ said the Eldest Magician; and he breathed upon the sand and
the rocks, where they had fallen in the sea, and they became the most
beautiful islands of Borneo, Celebes, Sumatra, Java, and the rest of the
Malay Archipelago, and you can look them out on the map!

By and by the Eldest Magician met the Man on the banks of the Perak
river, and said, ‘Ho! Son of Adam, are all the Animals obedient to you?’

‘Yes,’ said the Man.

‘Is all the Earth obedient to you?’

‘Yes,’ said the Man.

‘Is all the Sea obedient to you?’

‘No,’ said the Man. ‘Once a day and once a night the Sea runs up the
Perak river and drives the sweet-water back into the forest, so that my
house is made wet; once a day and once a night it runs down the river
and draws all the water after it, so that there is nothing left but mud,
and my canoe is upset. Is that the play you told it to play?’

‘No,’ said the Eldest Magician. ‘That is a new and a bad play.’

‘Look!’ said the Man, and as he spoke the great Sea came up the mouth of
the Perak river, driving the river backwards till it overflowed all the
dark forests for miles and miles, and flooded the Man’s house.

‘This is wrong. Launch your canoe and we will find out who is playing
with the Sea,’ said the Eldest Magician. They stepped into the canoe;
the little girl-daughter came with them; and the Man took his kris--a
curving, wavy dagger with a blade like a flame,--and they pushed out on
the Perak river. Then the sea began to run back and back, and the canoe
was sucked out of the mouth of the Perak river, past Selangor, past
Malacca, past Singapore, out and out to the Island of Bingtang, as
though it had been pulled by a string.

Then the Eldest Magician stood up and shouted, ‘Ho! beasts, birds, and
fishes, that I took between my hands at the Very Beginning and taught
the play that you should play, which one of you is playing with the
Sea?’

Then all the beasts, birds, and fishes said together, ‘Eldest Magician,
we play the plays that you taught us to play--we and our children’s
children. But not one of us plays with the Sea.’

Then the Moon rose big and full over the water, and the Eldest Magician
said to the hunchbacked old man who sits in the Moon spinning a
fishing-line with which he hopes one day to catch the world, ‘Ho! Fisher
of the Moon, are you playing with the Sea?’

‘No,’ said the Fisherman, ‘I am spinning a line with which I shall some
day catch the world; but I do not play with the Sea.’ And he went on
spinning his line.

Now there is also a Rat up in the Moon who always bites the old
Fisherman’s line as fast as it is made, and the Eldest Magician said to
him, ‘Ho! Rat of the Moon, are you playing with the Sea?’

And the Rat said, ‘I am too busy biting through the line that this
old Fisherman is spinning. I do not play with the Sea.’ And he went on
biting the line.

Then the little girl-daughter put up her little soft brown arms with the
beautiful white shell bracelets and said, ‘O Eldest Magician! when my
father here talked to you at the Very Beginning, and I leaned upon his
shoulder while the beasts were being taught their plays, one beast went
away naughtily into the Sea before you had taught him his play.

And the Eldest Magician said, ‘How wise are little children who see and
are silent! What was the beast like?’

And the little girl-daughter said, ‘He was round and he was flat; and
his eyes grew upon stalks; and he walked sideways like this; and he was
covered with strong armour upon his back.’

And the Eldest Magician said, ‘How wise are little children who speak
truth! Now I know where Pau Amma went. Give me the paddle!’

So he took the paddle; but there was no need to paddle, for the water
flowed steadily past all the islands till they came to the place called
Pusat Tasek--the Heart of the Sea--where the great hollow is that leads
down to the heart of the world, and in that hollow grows the Wonderful
Tree, Pauh Janggi, that bears the magic twin nuts. Then the Eldest
Magician slid his arm up to the shoulder through the deep warm water,
and under the roots of the Wonderful Tree he touched the broad back of
Pau Amma the Crab. And Pau Amma settled down at the touch, and all the
Sea rose up as water rises in a basin when you put your hand into it.

‘Ah!’ said the Eldest Magician. ‘Now I know who has been playing with
the Sea;’ and he called out, ‘What are you doing, Pau Amma?’

And Pau Amma, deep down below, answered, ‘Once a day and once a night I
go out to look for my food. Once a day and once a night I return. Leave
me alone.’

Then the Eldest Magician said, ‘Listen, Pau Amma. When you go out from
your cave the waters of the Sea pour down into Pusat Tasek, and all the
beaches of all the islands are left bare, and the little fish die, and
Raja Moyang Kaban, the King of the Elephants, his legs are made muddy.
When you come back and sit in Pusat Tasek, the waters of the Sea rise,
and half the little islands are drowned, and the Man’s house is flooded,
and Raja Abdullah, the King of the Crocodiles, his mouth is filled with
the salt water.

Then Pau Amma, deep down below, laughed and said, ‘I did not know I
was so important. Henceforward I will go out seven times a day, and the
waters shall never be still.’

And the Eldest Magician said, ‘I cannot make you play the play you were
meant to play, Pau Amma, because you escaped me at the Very Beginning;
but if you are not afraid, come up and we will talk about it.’

‘I am not afraid,’ said Pau Amma, and he rose to the top of the sea in
the moonlight. There was nobody in the world so big as Pau Amma--for he
was the King Crab of all Crabs. Not a common Crab, but a King Crab. One
side of his great shell touched the beach at Sarawak; the other
touched the beach at Pahang; and he was taller than the smoke of three
volcanoes! As he rose up through the branches of the Wonderful Tree he
tore off one of the great twin fruits--the magic double kernelled nuts
that make people young,--and the little girl-daughter saw it bobbing
alongside the canoe, and pulled it in and began to pick out the soft
eyes of it with her little golden scissors.

‘Now,’ said the Magician, ‘make a Magic, Pau Amma, to show that you are
really important.’

Pau Amma rolled his eyes and waved his legs, but he could only stir up
the Sea, because, though he was a King Crab, he was nothing more than a
Crab, and the Eldest Magician laughed.

‘You are not so important after all, Pau Amma,’ he said. ‘Now, let
me try,’ and he made a Magic with his left hand--with just the little
finger of his left hand--and--lo and behold, Best Beloved, Pau Amma’s
hard, blue-green-black shell fell off him as a husk falls off a
cocoa-nut, and Pau Amma was left all soft--soft as the little crabs that
you sometimes find on the beach, Best Beloved.

‘Indeed, you are very important,’ said the Eldest Magician. ‘Shall I ask
the Man here to cut you with kris? Shall I send for Raja Moyang Kaban,
the King of the Elephants, to pierce you with his tusks, or shall I call
Raja Abdullah, the King of the Crocodiles, to bite you?’

And Pau Amma said, ‘I am ashamed! Give me back my hard shell and let me
go back to Pusat Tasek, and I will only stir out once a day and once a
night to get my food.’

And the Eldest Magician said, ‘No, Pau Amma, I will not give you back
your shell, for you will grow bigger and prouder and stronger, and
perhaps you will forget your promise, and you will play with the Sea
once more.

Then Pau Amma said, ‘What shall I do? I am so big that I can only hide
in Pusat Tasek, and if I go anywhere else, all soft as I am now, the
sharks and the dogfish will eat me. And if I go to Pusat Tasek, all soft
as I am now, though I may be safe, I can never stir out to get my food,
and so I shall die.’ Then he waved his legs and lamented.

‘Listen, Pau Amma,’ said the Eldest Magician. ‘I cannot make you play
the play you were meant to play, because you escaped me at the Very
Beginning; but if you choose, I can make every stone and every hole and
every bunch of weed in all the seas a safe Pusat Tasek for you and your
children for always.’

Then Pau Amma said, ‘That is good, but I do not choose yet. Look! there
is that Man who talked to you at the Very Beginning. If he had not taken
up your attention I should not have grown tired of waiting and run away,
and all this would never have happened. What will he do for me?’

And the Man said, ‘If you choose, I will make a Magic, so that both
the deep water and the dry ground will be a home for you and your
children--so that you shall be able to hide both on the land and in the
sea.’

And Pau Amma said, ‘I do not choose yet. Look! there is that girl who
saw me running away at the Very Beginning. If she had spoken then, the
Eldest Magician would have called me back, and all this would never have
happened. What will she do for me?’

And the little girl-daughter said, ‘This is a good nut that I am eating.
If you choose, I will make a Magic and I will give you this pair of
scissors, very sharp and strong, so that you and your children can eat
cocoa-nuts like this all day long when you come up from the Sea to the
land; or you can dig a Pusat Tasek for yourself with the scissors that
belong to you when there is no stone or hole near by; and when the earth
is too hard, by the help of these same scissors you can run up a tree.’

And Pau Amma said, ‘I do not choose yet, for, all soft as I am, these
gifts would not help me. Give me back my shell, O Eldest Magician, and
then I will play your play.’

And the Eldest Magician said, ‘I will give it back, Pau Amma, for eleven
months of the year; but on the twelfth month of every year it shall grow
soft again, to remind you and all your children that I can make magics,
and to keep you humble, Pau Amma; for I see that if you can run both
under the water and on land, you will grow too bold; and if you can
climb trees and crack nuts and dig holes with your scissors, you will
grow too greedy, Pau Amma.’

Then Pau Amma thought a little and said, ‘I have made my choice. I will
take all the gifts.’

Then the Eldest Magician made a Magic with the right hand, with all five
fingers of his right hand, and lo and behold, Best Beloved, Pau Amma
grew smaller and smaller and smaller, till at last there was only a
little green crab swimming in the water alongside the canoe, crying in a
very small voice, ‘Give me the scissors!’

And the girl-daughter picked him up on the palm of her little brown
hand, and sat him in the bottom of the canoe and gave him her scissors,
and he waved them in his little arms, and opened them and shut them and
snapped them, and said, ‘I can eat nuts. I can crack shells. I can dig
holes. I can climb trees. I can breathe in the dry air, and I can find
a safe Pusat Tasek under every stone. I did not know I was so important.
Kun?’ (Is this right?)

‘Payah-kun,’ said the Eldest Magician, and he laughed and gave him his
blessing; and little Pau Amma scuttled over the side of the canoe into
the water; and he was so tiny that he could have hidden under the shadow
of a dry leaf on land or of a dead shell at the bottom of the sea.

‘Was that well done?’ said the Eldest Magician.

‘Yes,’ said the Man. ‘But now we must go back to Perak, and that is
a weary way to paddle. If we had waited till Pau Amma had gone out of
Pusat Tasek and come home, the water would have carried us there by
itself.’

‘You are lazy,’ said the Eldest Magician. ‘So your children shall be
lazy. They shall be the laziest people in the world. They shall be
called the Malazy--the lazy people;’ and he held up his finger to the
Moon and said, ‘O Fisherman, here is the Man too lazy to row home. Pull
his canoe home with your line, Fisherman.’

‘No,’ said the Man. ‘If I am to be lazy all my days, let the Sea work
for me twice a day for ever. That will save paddling.’

And the Eldest Magician laughed and said, ‘Payah kun’ (That is right).

And the Rat of the Moon stopped biting the line; and the Fisherman let
his line down till it touched the Sea, and he pulled the whole deep Sea
along, past the Island of Bintang, past Singapore, past Malacca, past
Selangor, till the canoe whirled into the mouth of the Perak River
again. Kun?’ said the Fisherman of the Moon.

‘Payah kun,’ said the Eldest Magician. ‘See now that you pull the Sea
twice a day and twice a night for ever, so that the Malazy fishermen may
be saved paddling. But be careful not to do it too hard, or I shall make
a magic on you as I did to Pau Amma.’

Then they all went up the Perak River and went to bed, Best Beloved.

Now listen and attend!

From that day to this the Moon has always pulled the sea up and down
and made what we call the tides. Sometimes the Fisher of the Sea pulls a
little too hard, and then we get spring tides; and sometimes he pulls
a little too softly, and then we get what are called neap-tides; but
nearly always he is careful, because of the Eldest Magician.

And Pau Amma? You can see when you go to the beach, how all Pau Amma’s
babies make little Pusat Taseks for themselves under every stone
and bunch of weed on the sands; you can see them waving their little
scissors; and in some parts of the world they truly live on the dry
land and run up the palm trees and eat cocoa-nuts, exactly as the
girl-daughter promised. But once a year all Pau Ammas must shake off
their hard armour and be soft-to remind them of what the Eldest Magician
could do. And so it isn’t fair to kill or hunt Pau Amma’s babies just
because old Pau Amma was stupidly rude a very long time ago.

Oh yes! And Pau Amma’s babies hate being taken out of their little Pusat
Taseks and brought home in pickle-bottles. That is why they nip you with
their scissors, and it serves you right!


     CHINA-GOING P’s and O’s
     Pass Pau Amma’s playground close,
     And his Pusat Tasek lies
     Near the track of most B.I.’s.
     U.Y.K. and N.D.L.
     Know Pau Amma’s home as well
     As the fisher of the Sea knows
     ‘Bens,’ M.M.’s, and Rubattinos.
     But (and this is rather queer)
     A.T.L.’s can not come here;
     O. and O. and D.O.A.
     Must go round another way.
     Orient, Anchor, Bibby, Hall,
     Never go that way at all.
     U.C.S. would have a fit
     If it found itself on it.
     And if ‘Beavers’ took their cargoes
     To Penang instead of Lagos,
     Or a fat Shaw-Savill bore
     Passengers to Singapore,
     Or a White Star were to try a
     Little trip to Sourabaya,
     Or a B.S.A. went on
     Past Natal to Cheribon,
     Then great Mr. Lloyds would come
     With a wire and drag them home!

     You’ll know what my riddle means
     When you’ve eaten mangosteens.

Or if you can’t wait till then, ask them to let you have the outside
page of the Times; turn over to page 2 where it is marked ‘Shipping’
on the top left hand; then take the Atlas (and that is the finest
picture-book in the world) and see how the names of the places that
the steamers go to fit into the names of the places on the map. Any
steamer-kiddy ought to be able to do that; but if you can’t read, ask
some one to show it you.




THE CAT THAT WALKED BY HIMSELF

HEAR and attend and listen; for this befell and behappened and became
and was, O my Best Beloved, when the Tame animals were wild. The Dog was
wild, and the Horse was wild, and the Cow was wild, and the Sheep was
wild, and the Pig was wild--as wild as wild could be--and they walked in
the Wet Wild Woods by their wild lones. But the wildest of all the wild
animals was the Cat. He walked by himself, and all places were alike to
him.

Of course the Man was wild too. He was dreadfully wild. He didn’t even
begin to be tame till he met the Woman, and she told him that she
did not like living in his wild ways. She picked out a nice dry Cave,
instead of a heap of wet leaves, to lie down in; and she strewed clean
sand on the floor; and she lit a nice fire of wood at the back of
the Cave; and she hung a dried wild-horse skin, tail-down, across the
opening of the Cave; and she said, ‘Wipe you feet, dear, when you come
in, and now we’ll keep house.’

That night, Best Beloved, they ate wild sheep roasted on the hot stones,
and flavoured with wild garlic and wild pepper; and wild duck stuffed
with wild rice and wild fenugreek and wild coriander; and marrow-bones
of wild oxen; and wild cherries, and wild grenadillas. Then the Man
went to sleep in front of the fire ever so happy; but the Woman sat up,
combing her hair. She took the bone of the shoulder of mutton--the big
fat blade-bone--and she looked at the wonderful marks on it, and she
threw more wood on the fire, and she made a Magic. She made the First
Singing Magic in the world.

Out in the Wet Wild Woods all the wild animals gathered together where
they could see the light of the fire a long way off, and they wondered
what it meant.

Then Wild Horse stamped with his wild foot and said, ‘O my Friends and O
my Enemies, why have the Man and the Woman made that great light in that
great Cave, and what harm will it do us?’

Wild Dog lifted up his wild nose and smelled the smell of roast mutton,
and said, ‘I will go up and see and look, and say; for I think it is
good. Cat, come with me.’

‘Nenni!’ said the Cat. ‘I am the Cat who walks by himself, and all
places are alike to me. I will not come.’

‘Then we can never be friends again,’ said Wild Dog, and he trotted off
to the Cave. But when he had gone a little way the Cat said to himself,
‘All places are alike to me. Why should I not go too and see and look
and come away at my own liking.’ So he slipped after Wild Dog softly,
very softly, and hid himself where he could hear everything.

When Wild Dog reached the mouth of the Cave he lifted up the dried
horse-skin with his nose and sniffed the beautiful smell of the roast
mutton, and the Woman, looking at the blade-bone, heard him, and
laughed, and said, ‘Here comes the first. Wild Thing out of the Wild
Woods, what do you want?’

Wild Dog said, ‘O my Enemy and Wife of my Enemy, what is this that
smells so good in the Wild Woods?’

Then the Woman picked up a roasted mutton-bone and threw it to Wild Dog,
and said, ‘Wild Thing out of the Wild Woods, taste and try.’ Wild Dog
gnawed the bone, and it was more delicious than anything he had ever
tasted, and he said, ‘O my Enemy and Wife of my Enemy, give me another.’

The Woman said, ‘Wild Thing out of the Wild Woods, help my Man to hunt
through the day and guard this Cave at night, and I will give you as
many roast bones as you need.’

‘Ah!’ said the Cat, listening. ‘This is a very wise Woman, but she is
not so wise as I am.’

Wild Dog crawled into the Cave and laid his head on the Woman’s lap, and
said, ‘O my Friend and Wife of my Friend, I will help Your Man to hunt
through the day, and at night I will guard your Cave.’

‘Ah!’ said the Cat, listening. ‘That is a very foolish Dog.’ And he went
back through the Wet Wild Woods waving his wild tail, and walking by his
wild lone. But he never told anybody.

When the Man waked up he said, ‘What is Wild Dog doing here?’ And the
Woman said, ‘His name is not Wild Dog any more, but the First Friend,
because he will be our friend for always and always and always. Take him
with you when you go hunting.’

Next night the Woman cut great green armfuls of fresh grass from the
water-meadows, and dried it before the fire, so that it smelt like
new-mown hay, and she sat at the mouth of the Cave and plaited a halter
out of horse-hide, and she looked at the shoulder of mutton-bone--at the
big broad blade-bone--and she made a Magic. She made the Second Singing
Magic in the world.

Out in the Wild Woods all the wild animals wondered what had happened to
Wild Dog, and at last Wild Horse stamped with his foot and said, ‘I will
go and see and say why Wild Dog has not returned. Cat, come with me.’

‘Nenni!’ said the Cat. ‘I am the Cat who walks by himself, and all
places are alike to me. I will not come.’ But all the same he followed
Wild Horse softly, very softly, and hid himself where he could hear
everything.

When the Woman heard Wild Horse tripping and stumbling on his long mane,
she laughed and said, ‘Here comes the second. Wild Thing out of the Wild
Woods what do you want?’

Wild Horse said, ‘O my Enemy and Wife of my Enemy, where is Wild Dog?’

The Woman laughed, and picked up the blade-bone and looked at it, and
said, ‘Wild Thing out of the Wild Woods, you did not come here for Wild
Dog, but for the sake of this good grass.’

And Wild Horse, tripping and stumbling on his long mane, said, ‘That is
true; give it me to eat.’

The Woman said, ‘Wild Thing out of the Wild Woods, bend your wild head
and wear what I give you, and you shall eat the wonderful grass three
times a day.’

‘Ah,’ said the Cat, listening, ‘this is a clever Woman, but she is not
so clever as I am.’ Wild Horse bent his wild head, and the Woman slipped
the plaited hide halter over it, and Wild Horse breathed on the Woman’s
feet and said, ‘O my Mistress, and Wife of my Master, I will be your
servant for the sake of the wonderful grass.’

‘Ah,’ said the Cat, listening, ‘that is a very foolish Horse.’ And he
went back through the Wet Wild Woods, waving his wild tail and walking
by his wild lone. But he never told anybody.

When the Man and the Dog came back from hunting, the Man said, ‘What is
Wild Horse doing here?’ And the Woman said, ‘His name is not Wild Horse
any more, but the First Servant, because he will carry us from place
to place for always and always and always. Ride on his back when you go
hunting.

Next day, holding her wild head high that her wild horns should not
catch in the wild trees, Wild Cow came up to the Cave, and the Cat
followed, and hid himself just the same as before; and everything
happened just the same as before; and the Cat said the same things as
before, and when Wild Cow had promised to give her milk to the Woman
every day in exchange for the wonderful grass, the Cat went back through
the Wet Wild Woods waving his wild tail and walking by his wild lone,
just the same as before. But he never told anybody. And when the Man
and the Horse and the Dog came home from hunting and asked the same
questions same as before, the Woman said, ‘Her name is not Wild Cow any
more, but the Giver of Good Food. She will give us the warm white milk
for always and always and always, and I will take care of her while you
and the First Friend and the First Servant go hunting.

Next day the Cat waited to see if any other Wild thing would go up to
the Cave, but no one moved in the Wet Wild Woods, so the Cat walked
there by himself; and he saw the Woman milking the Cow, and he saw the
light of the fire in the Cave, and he smelt the smell of the warm white
milk.

Cat said, ‘O my Enemy and Wife of my Enemy, where did Wild Cow go?’

The Woman laughed and said, ‘Wild Thing out of the Wild Woods, go back
to the Woods again, for I have braided up my hair, and I have put away
the magic blade-bone, and we have no more need of either friends or
servants in our Cave.

Cat said, ‘I am not a friend, and I am not a servant. I am the Cat who
walks by himself, and I wish to come into your cave.’

Woman said, ‘Then why did you not come with First Friend on the first
night?’

Cat grew very angry and said, ‘Has Wild Dog told tales of me?’

Then the Woman laughed and said, ‘You are the Cat who walks by himself,
and all places are alike to you. Your are neither a friend nor a
servant. You have said it yourself. Go away and walk by yourself in all
places alike.’

Then Cat pretended to be sorry and said, ‘Must I never come into the
Cave? Must I never sit by the warm fire? Must I never drink the warm
white milk? You are very wise and very beautiful. You should not be
cruel even to a Cat.’

Woman said, ‘I knew I was wise, but I did not know I was beautiful. So I
will make a bargain with you. If ever I say one word in your praise you
may come into the Cave.’

‘And if you say two words in my praise?’ said the Cat.

‘I never shall,’ said the Woman, ‘but if I say two words in your praise,
you may sit by the fire in the Cave.’

‘And if you say three words?’ said the Cat.

‘I never shall,’ said the Woman, ‘but if I say three words in your
praise, you may drink the warm white milk three times a day for always
and always and always.’

Then the Cat arched his back and said, ‘Now let the Curtain at the mouth
of the Cave, and the Fire at the back of the Cave, and the Milk-pots
that stand beside the Fire, remember what my Enemy and the Wife of my
Enemy has said.’ And he went away through the Wet Wild Woods waving his
wild tail and walking by his wild lone.

That night when the Man and the Horse and the Dog came home from
hunting, the Woman did not tell them of the bargain that she had made
with the Cat, because she was afraid that they might not like it.

Cat went far and far away and hid himself in the Wet Wild Woods by his
wild lone for a long time till the Woman forgot all about him. Only the
Bat--the little upside-down Bat--that hung inside the Cave, knew where
Cat hid; and every evening Bat would fly to Cat with news of what was
happening.

One evening Bat said, ‘There is a Baby in the Cave. He is new and pink
and fat and small, and the Woman is very fond of him.’

‘Ah,’ said the Cat, listening, ‘but what is the Baby fond of?’

‘He is fond of things that are soft and tickle,’ said the Bat. ‘He is
fond of warm things to hold in his arms when he goes to sleep. He is
fond of being played with. He is fond of all those things.’

‘Ah,’ said the Cat, listening, ‘then my time has come.’

Next night Cat walked through the Wet Wild Woods and hid very near the
Cave till morning-time, and Man and Dog and Horse went hunting. The
Woman was busy cooking that morning, and the Baby cried and interrupted.
So she carried him outside the Cave and gave him a handful of pebbles to
play with. But still the Baby cried.

Then the Cat put out his paddy paw and patted the Baby on the cheek, and
it cooed; and the Cat rubbed against its fat knees and tickled it under
its fat chin with his tail. And the Baby laughed; and the Woman heard
him and smiled.

Then the Bat--the little upside-down bat--that hung in the mouth of the
Cave said, ‘O my Hostess and Wife of my Host and Mother of my Host’s
Son, a Wild Thing from the Wild Woods is most beautifully playing with
your Baby.’

‘A blessing on that Wild Thing whoever he may be,’ said the Woman,
straightening her back, ‘for I was a busy woman this morning and he has
done me a service.’

That very minute and second, Best Beloved, the dried horse-skin
Curtain that was stretched tail-down at the mouth of the Cave fell
down--whoosh!--because it remembered the bargain she had made with the
Cat, and when the Woman went to pick it up--lo and behold!--the Cat was
sitting quite comfy inside the Cave.

‘O my Enemy and Wife of my Enemy and Mother of my Enemy,’ said the Cat,
‘it is I: for you have spoken a word in my praise, and now I can sit
within the Cave for always and always and always. But still I am the Cat
who walks by himself, and all places are alike to me.’

The Woman was very angry, and shut her lips tight and took up her
spinning-wheel and began to spin. But the Baby cried because the Cat had
gone away, and the Woman could not hush it, for it struggled and kicked
and grew black in the face.

‘O my Enemy and Wife of my Enemy and Mother of my Enemy,’ said the Cat,
‘take a strand of the wire that you are spinning and tie it to your
spinning-whorl and drag it along the floor, and I will show you a magic
that shall make your Baby laugh as loudly as he is now crying.’

‘I will do so,’ said the Woman, ‘because I am at my wits’ end; but I
will not thank you for it.’

She tied the thread to the little clay spindle whorl and drew it across
the floor, and the Cat ran after it and patted it with his paws and
rolled head over heels, and tossed it backward over his shoulder and
chased it between his hind-legs and pretended to lose it, and pounced
down upon it again, till the Baby laughed as loudly as it had been
crying, and scrambled after the Cat and frolicked all over the Cave till
it grew tired and settled down to sleep with the Cat in its arms.

‘Now,’ said the Cat, ‘I will sing the Baby a song that shall keep him
asleep for an hour. And he began to purr, loud and low, low and loud,
till the Baby fell fast asleep. The Woman smiled as she looked down upon
the two of them and said, ‘That was wonderfully done. No question but
you are very clever, O Cat.’

That very minute and second, Best Beloved, the smoke of the fire at the
back of the Cave came down in clouds from the roof--puff!--because
it remembered the bargain she had made with the Cat, and when it had
cleared away--lo and behold!--the Cat was sitting quite comfy close to
the fire.

‘O my Enemy and Wife of my Enemy and Mother of My Enemy,’ said the Cat,
‘it is I, for you have spoken a second word in my praise, and now I can
sit by the warm fire at the back of the Cave for always and always and
always. But still I am the Cat who walks by himself, and all places are
alike to me.’

Then the Woman was very very angry, and let down her hair and put more
wood on the fire and brought out the broad blade-bone of the shoulder of
mutton and began to make a Magic that should prevent her from saying
a third word in praise of the Cat. It was not a Singing Magic, Best
Beloved, it was a Still Magic; and by and by the Cave grew so still that
a little wee-wee mouse crept out of a corner and ran across the floor.

‘O my Enemy and Wife of my Enemy and Mother of my Enemy,’ said the Cat,
‘is that little mouse part of your magic?’

‘Ouh! Chee! No indeed!’ said the Woman, and she dropped the blade-bone
and jumped upon the footstool in front of the fire and braided up her
hair very quick for fear that the mouse should run up it.

‘Ah,’ said the Cat, watching, ‘then the mouse will do me no harm if I
eat it?’

‘No,’ said the Woman, braiding up her hair, ‘eat it quickly and I will
ever be grateful to you.’

Cat made one jump and caught the little mouse, and the Woman said,
‘A hundred thanks. Even the First Friend is not quick enough to catch
little mice as you have done. You must be very wise.’

That very moment and second, O Best Beloved, the Milk-pot that stood by
the fire cracked in two pieces--ffft--because it remembered the bargain
she had made with the Cat, and when the Woman jumped down from the
footstool--lo and behold!--the Cat was lapping up the warm white milk
that lay in one of the broken pieces.

‘O my Enemy and Wife of my Enemy and Mother of my Enemy, said the Cat,
‘it is I; for you have spoken three words in my praise, and now I can
drink the warm white milk three times a day for always and always and
always. But still I am the Cat who walks by himself, and all places are
alike to me.’

Then the Woman laughed and set the Cat a bowl of the warm white milk and
said, ‘O Cat, you are as clever as a man, but remember that your bargain
was not made with the Man or the Dog, and I do not know what they will
do when they come home.’

‘What is that to me?’ said the Cat. ‘If I have my place in the Cave by
the fire and my warm white milk three times a day I do not care what the
Man or the Dog can do.’

That evening when the Man and the Dog came into the Cave, the Woman
told them all the story of the bargain while the Cat sat by the fire and
smiled. Then the Man said, ‘Yes, but he has not made a bargain with me
or with all proper Men after me.’ Then he took off his two leather boots
and he took up his little stone axe (that makes three) and he fetched a
piece of wood and a hatchet (that is five altogether), and he set them
out in a row and he said, ‘Now we will make our bargain. If you do not
catch mice when you are in the Cave for always and always and always, I
will throw these five things at you whenever I see you, and so shall all
proper Men do after me.’

‘Ah,’ said the Woman, listening, ‘this is a very clever Cat, but he is
not so clever as my Man.’

The Cat counted the five things (and they looked very knobby) and he
said, ‘I will catch mice when I am in the Cave for always and always and
always; but still I am the Cat who walks by himself, and all places are
alike to me.’

‘Not when I am near,’ said the Man. ‘If you had not said that last I
would have put all these things away for always and always and always;
but I am now going to throw my two boots and my little stone axe (that
makes three) at you whenever I meet you. And so shall all proper Men do
after me!’

Then the Dog said, ‘Wait a minute. He has not made a bargain with me or
with all proper Dogs after me.’ And he showed his teeth and said, ‘If
you are not kind to the Baby while I am in the Cave for always and
always and always, I will hunt you till I catch you, and when I catch
you I will bite you. And so shall all proper Dogs do after me.’

‘Ah,’ said the Woman, listening, ‘this is a very clever Cat, but he is
not so clever as the Dog.’

Cat counted the Dog’s teeth (and they looked very pointed) and he said,
‘I will be kind to the Baby while I am in the Cave, as long as he does
not pull my tail too hard, for always and always and always. But still I
am the Cat that walks by himself, and all places are alike to me.’

‘Not when I am near,’ said the Dog. ‘If you had not said that last I
would have shut my mouth for always and always and always; but now I am
going to hunt you up a tree whenever I meet you. And so shall all proper
Dogs do after me.’

Then the Man threw his two boots and his little stone axe (that makes
three) at the Cat, and the Cat ran out of the Cave and the Dog chased
him up a tree; and from that day to this, Best Beloved, three proper Men
out of five will always throw things at a Cat whenever they meet him,
and all proper Dogs will chase him up a tree. But the Cat keeps his side
of the bargain too. He will kill mice and he will be kind to Babies when
he is in the house, just as long as they do not pull his tail too hard.
But when he has done that, and between times, and when the moon gets up
and night comes, he is the Cat that walks by himself, and all places are
alike to him. Then he goes out to the Wet Wild Woods or up the Wet Wild
Trees or on the Wet Wild Roofs, waving his wild tail and walking by his
wild lone.


     PUSSY can sit by the fire and sing,
       Pussy can climb a tree,
     Or play with a silly old cork and string
       To’muse herself, not me.
     But I like Binkie my dog, because
       He Lnows how to behave;
     So, Binkie’s the same as the First Friend was,
       And I am the Man in the Cave.

     Pussy will play man-Friday till
       It’s time to wet her paw
     And make her walk on the window-sill
       (For the footprint Crusoe saw);
     Then she fluffles her tail and mews,
       And scratches and won’t attend.
     But Binkie will play whatever I choose,
       And he is my true First Friend.

     Pussy will rub my knees with her head
       Pretending she loves me hard;
     But the very minute I go to my bed
       Pussy runs out in the yard,
     And there she stays till the morning-light;
       So I know it is only pretend;
     But Binkie, he snores at my feet all night,
       And he is my Firstest Friend!




THE BUTTERFLY THAT STAMPED

THIS, O my Best Beloved, is a story--a new and a wonderful story--a
story quite different from the other stories--a story about The Most
Wise Sovereign Suleiman-bin-Daoud--Solomon the Son of David.

There are three hundred and fifty-five stories about Suleiman-bin-Daoud;
but this is not one of them. It is not the story of the Lapwing who
found the Water; or the Hoopoe who shaded Suleimanbin-Daoud from the
heat. It is not the story of the Glass Pavement, or the Ruby with
the Crooked Hole, or the Gold Bars of Balkis. It is the story of the
Butterfly that Stamped.

Now attend all over again and listen!

Suleiman-bin-Daoud was wise. He understood what the beasts said, what
the birds said, what the fishes said, and what the insects said. He
understood what the rocks said deep under the earth when they bowed in
towards each other and groaned; and he understood what the trees
said when they rustled in the middle of the morning. He understood
everything, from the bishop on the bench to the hyssop on the wall, and
Balkis, his Head Queen, the Most Beautiful Queen Balkis, was nearly as
wise as he was.

Suleiman-bin-Daoud was strong. Upon the third finger of the right hand
he wore a ring. When he turned it once, Afrits and Djinns came Out of
the earth to do whatever he told them. When he turned it twice, Fairies
came down from the sky to do whatever he told them; and when he turned
it three times, the very great angel Azrael of the Sword came dressed
as a water-carrier, and told him the news of the three worlds,
Above--Below--and Here.

And yet Suleiman-bin-Daoud was not proud. He very seldom showed off, and
when he did he was sorry for it. Once he tried to feed all the animals
in all the world in one day, but when the food was ready an Animal came
out of the deep sea and ate it up in three mouthfuls. Suleiman-bin-Daoud
was very surprised and said, ‘O Animal, who are you?’ And the Animal
said, ‘O King, live for ever! I am the smallest of thirty thousand
brothers, and our home is at the bottom of the sea. We heard that you
were going to feed all the animals in all the world, and my brothers
sent me to ask when dinner would be ready.’ Suleiman-bin-Daoud was more
surprised than ever and said, ‘O Animal, you have eaten all the dinner
that I made ready for all the animals in the world.’ And the Animal
said, ‘O King, live for ever, but do you really call that a dinner?
Where I come from we each eat twice as much as that between meals.’ Then
Suleiman-bin-Daoud fell flat on his face and said, ‘O Animal! I gave
that dinner to show what a great and rich king I was, and not because I
really wanted to be kind to the animals. Now I am ashamed, and it serves
me right. Suleiman-bin-Daoud was a really truly wise man, Best Beloved.
After that he never forgot that it was silly to show off; and now the
real story part of my story begins.

He married ever so many wifes. He married nine hundred and ninety-nine
wives, besides the Most Beautiful Balkis; and they all lived in a great
golden palace in the middle of a lovely garden with fountains. He
didn’t really want nine-hundred and ninety-nine wives, but in those
days everybody married ever so many wives, and of course the King had to
marry ever so many more just to show that he was the King.

Some of the wives were nice, but some were simply horrid, and the horrid
ones quarrelled with the nice ones and made them horrid too, and then
they would all quarrel with Suleiman-bin-Daoud, and that was horrid
for him. But Balkis the Most Beautiful never quarrelled with
Suleiman-bin-Daoud. She loved him too much. She sat in her rooms in the
Golden Palace, or walked in the Palace garden, and was truly sorry for
him.

Of course if he had chosen to turn his ring on his finger and call
up the Djinns and the Afrits they would have magicked all those nine
hundred and ninety-nine quarrelsome wives into white mules of the desert
or greyhounds or pomegranate seeds; but Suleiman-bin-Daoud thought that
that would be showing off. So, when they quarrelled too much, he only
walked by himself in one part of the beautiful Palace gardens and wished
he had never been born.

One day, when they had quarrelled for three weeks--all nine hundred and
ninety-nine wives together--Suleiman-bin-Daoud went out for peace
and quiet as usual; and among the orange trees he met Balkis the Most
Beautiful, very sorrowful because Suleiman-bin-Daoud was so worried.
And she said to him, ‘O my Lord and Light of my Eyes, turn the ring upon
your finger and show these Queens of Egypt and Mesopotamia and
Persia and China that you are the great and terrible King.’ But
Suleiman-bin-Daoud shook his head and said, ‘O my Lady and Delight of my
Life, remember the Animal that came out of the sea and made me ashamed
before all the animals in all the world because I showed off. Now, if
I showed off before these Queens of Persia and Egypt and Abyssinia and
China, merely because they worry me, I might be made even more ashamed
than I have been.’

And Balkis the Most Beautiful said, ‘O my Lord and Treasure of my Soul,
what will you do?’

And Suleiman-bin-Daoud said, ‘O my Lady and Content of my Heart, I
shall continue to endure my fate at the hands of these nine hundred and
ninety-nine Queens who vex me with their continual quarrelling.’

So he went on between the lilies and the loquats and the roses and the
cannas and the heavy-scented ginger-plants that grew in the garden, till
he came to the great camphor-tree that was called the Camphor Tree of
Suleiman-bin-Daoud. But Balkis hid among the tall irises and the spotted
bamboos and the red lillies behind the camphor-tree, so as to be near
her own true love, Suleiman-bin-Daoud.

Presently two Butterflies flew under the tree, quarrelling.

Suleiman-bin-Daoud heard one say to the other, ‘I wonder at your
presumption in talking like this to me. Don’t you know that if I stamped
with my foot all Suleiman-bin-Daoud’s Palace and this garden here would
immediately vanish in a clap of thunder.’

Then Suleiman-bin-Daoud forgot his nine hundred and ninety-nine
bothersome wives, and laughed, till the camphor-tree shook, at the
Butterfly’s boast. And he held out his finger and said, ‘Little man,
come here.’

The Butterfly was dreadfully frightened, but he managed to fly up to
the hand of Suleiman-bin-Daoud, and clung there, fanning himself.
Suleiman-bin-Daoud bent his head and whispered very softly, ‘Little man,
you know that all your stamping wouldn’t bend one blade of grass. What
made you tell that awful fib to your wife?--for doubtless she is your
wife.’

The Butterfly looked at Suleiman-bin-Daoud and saw the most wise King’s
eye twinkle like stars on a frosty night, and he picked up his courage
with both wings, and he put his head on one side and said, ‘O King, live
for ever. She is my wife; and you know what wives are like.

Suleiman-bin-Daoud smiled in his beard and said, ‘Yes, I know, little
brother.

‘One must keep them in order somehow, said the Butterfly, and she has
been quarrelling with me all the morning. I said that to quiet her.’

And Suleiman-bin-Daoud said, ‘May it quiet her. Go back to your wife,
little brother, and let me hear what you say.’

Back flew the Butterfly to his wife, who was all of a twitter behind
a leaf, and she said, ‘He heard you! Suleiman-bin-Daoud himself heard
you!’

‘Heard me!’ said the Butterfly. ‘Of course he did. I meant him to hear
me.’

‘And what did he say? Oh, what did he say?’

‘Well,’ said the Butterfly, fanning himself most importantly, ‘between
you and me, my dear--of course I don’t blame him, because his Palace
must have cost a great deal and the oranges are just ripening,--he asked
me not to stamp, and I promised I wouldn’t.’

‘Gracious!’ said his wife, and sat quite quiet; but Suleiman-bin-Daoud
laughed till the tears ran down his face at the impudence of the bad
little Butterfly.

Balkis the Most Beautiful stood up behind the tree among the red lilies
and smiled to herself, for she had heard all this talk. She thought,
‘If I am wise I can yet save my Lord from the persecutions of these
quarrelsome Queens,’ and she held out her finger and whispered softly to
the Butterfly’s Wife, ‘Little woman, come here.’ Up flew the Butterfly’s
Wife, very frightened, and clung to Balkis’s white hand.

Balkis bent her beautiful head down and whispered, ‘Little woman, do you
believe what your husband has just said?’

The Butterfly’s Wife looked at Balkis, and saw the most beautiful
Queen’s eyes shining like deep pools with starlight on them, and she
picked up her courage with both wings and said, ‘O Queen, be lovely for
ever. You know what men-folk are like.’

And the Queen Balkis, the Wise Balkis of Sheba, put her hand to her lips
to hide a smile and said, ‘Little sister, I know.’

‘They get angry,’ said the Butterfly’s Wife, fanning herself quickly,
‘over nothing at all, but we must humour them, O Queen. They never mean
half they say. If it pleases my husband to believe that I believe he
can make Suleiman-bin-Daoud’s Palace disappear by stamping his foot, I’m
sure I don’t care. He’ll forget all about it to-morrow.’

‘Little sister,’ said Balkis, ‘you are quite right; but next time he
begins to boast, take him at his word. Ask him to stamp, and see what
will happen. We know what men-folk are like, don’t we? He’ll be very
much ashamed.’

Away flew the Butterfly’s Wife to her husband, and in five minutes they
were quarrelling worse than ever.

‘Remember!’ said the Butterfly. ‘Remember what I can do if I stamp my
foot.’

‘I don’t believe you one little bit,’ said the Butterfly’s Wife. ‘I
should very much like to see it done. Suppose you stamp now.’

‘I promised Suleiman-bin-Daoud that I wouldn’t,’ said the Butterfly,
‘and I don’t want to break my promise.’

‘It wouldn’t matter if you did,’ said his wife. ‘You couldn’t bend
a blade of grass with your stamping. I dare you to do it,’ she said.
Stamp! Stamp! Stamp!’

Suleiman-bin-Daoud, sitting under the camphor-tree, heard every word
of this, and he laughed as he had never laughed in his life before. He
forgot all about his Queens; he forgot all about the Animal that came
out of the sea; he forgot about showing off. He just laughed with joy,
and Balkis, on the other side of the tree, smiled because her own true
love was so joyful.

Presently the Butterfly, very hot and puffy, came whirling back under
the shadow of the camphor-tree and said to Suleiman, ‘She wants me to
stamp! She wants to see what will happen, O Suleiman-bin-Daoud! You know
I can’t do it, and now she’ll never believe a word I say. She’ll laugh
at me to the end of my days!’

‘No, little brother,’ said Suleiman-bin-Daoud, ‘she will never laugh at
you again,’ and he turned the ring on his finger--just for the little
Butterfly’s sake, not for the sake of showing off,--and, lo and behold,
four huge Djinns came out of the earth!

‘Slaves,’ said Suleiman-bin-Daoud, ‘when this gentleman on my finger’
(that was where the impudent Butterfly was sitting) ‘stamps his left
front forefoot you will make my Palace and these gardens disappear in
a clap of thunder. When he stamps again you will bring them back
carefully.’

‘Now, little brother,’ he said, ‘go back to your wife and stamp all
you’ve a mind to.’

Away flew the Butterfly to his wife, who was crying, ‘I dare you to do
it! I dare you to do it! Stamp! Stamp now! Stamp!’ Balkis saw the four
vast Djinns stoop down to the four corners of the gardens with the
Palace in the middle, and she clapped her hands softly and said, ‘At
last Suleiman-bin-Daoud will do for the sake of a Butterfly what he
ought to have done long ago for his own sake, and the quarrelsome Queens
will be frightened!’

The the butterfly stamped. The Djinns jerked the Palace and the gardens
a thousand miles into the air: there was a most awful thunder-clap, and
everything grew inky-black. The Butterfly’s Wife fluttered about in the
dark, crying, ‘Oh, I’ll be good! I’m so sorry I spoke. Only bring the
gardens back, my dear darling husband, and I’ll never contradict again.’

The Butterfly was nearly as frightened as his wife, and
Suleiman-bin-Daoud laughed so much that it was several minutes before
he found breath enough to whisper to the Butterfly, ‘Stamp again, little
brother. Give me back my Palace, most great magician.’

‘Yes, give him back his Palace,’ said the Butterfly’s Wife, still flying
about in the dark like a moth. ‘Give him back his Palace, and don’t
let’s have any more horrid.magic.’

‘Well, my dear,’ said the Butterfly as bravely as he could, ‘you see
what your nagging has led to. Of course it doesn’t make any difference
to me--I’m used to this kind of thing--but as a favour to you and to
Suleiman-bin-Daoud I don’t mind putting things right.’

So he stamped once more, and that instant the Djinns let down the Palace
and the gardens, without even a bump. The sun shone on the dark-green
orange leaves; the fountains played among the pink Egyptian lilies; the
birds went on singing, and the Butterfly’s Wife lay on her side under
the camphor-tree waggling her wings and panting, ‘Oh, I’ll be good! I’ll
be good!’

Suleiman-bin-Daolld could hardly speak for laughing. He leaned back all
weak and hiccoughy, and shook his finger at the Butterfly and said, ‘O
great wizard, what is the sense of returning to me my Palace if at the
same time you slay me with mirth!’

Then came a terrible noise, for all the nine hundred and ninety-nine
Queens ran out of the Palace shrieking and shouting and calling for
their babies. They hurried down the great marble steps below the
fountain, one hundred abreast, and the Most Wise Balkis went statelily
forward to meet them and said, ‘What is your trouble, O Queens?’

They stood on the marble steps one hundred abreast and shouted, ‘What is
our trouble? We were living peacefully in our golden palace, as is our
custom, when upon a sudden the Palace disappeared, and we were left
sitting in a thick and noisome darkness; and it thundered, and Djinns
and Afrits moved about in the darkness! That is our trouble, O Head
Queen, and we are most extremely troubled on account of that trouble,
for it was a troublesome trouble, unlike any trouble we have known.’

Then Balkis the Most Beautiful Queen--Suleiman-bin-Daoud’s Very Best
Beloved--Queen that was of Sheba and Sable and the Rivers of the Gold
of the South--from the Desert of Zinn to the Towers of Zimbabwe--Balkis,
almost as wise as the Most Wise Suleiman-bin-Daoud himself, said, ‘It
is nothing, O Queens! A Butterfly has made complaint against his
wife because she quarrelled with him, and it has pleased our Lord
Suleiman-bin-Daoud to teach her a lesson in low-speaking and humbleness,
for that is counted a virtue among the wives of the butterflies.’

Then up and spoke an Egyptian Queen--the daughter of a Pharoah--and she
said, ‘Our Palace cannot be plucked up by the roots like a leek for the
sake of a little insect. No! Suleiman-bin-Daoud must be dead, and what
we heard and saw was the earth thundering and darkening at the news.’

Then Balkis beckoned that bold Queen without looking at her, and said to
her and to the others, ‘Come and see.’

They came down the marble steps, one hundred abreast, and beneath his
camphor-tree, still weak with laughing, they saw the Most Wise King
Suleiman-bin-Daoud rocking back and forth with a Butterfly on either
hand, and they heard him say, ‘O wife of my brother in the air, remember
after this, to please your husband in all things, lest he be provoked to
stamp his foot yet again; for he has said that he is used to this magic,
and he is most eminently a great magician--one who steals away the very
Palace of Suleirnan-bin-Daoud himself. Go in peace, little folk!’ And he
kissed them on the wings, and they flew away.

Then all the Queens except Balkis--the Most Beautiful and Splendid
Balkis, who stood apart smiling--fell flat on their faces, for they
said, ‘If these things are done when a Butterfly is displeased with
his wife, what shall be done to us who have vexed our King with our
loud-speaking and open quarrelling through many days?’

Then they put their veils over their heads, and they put their hands
over their mouths, and they tiptoed back to the Palace most mousy-quiet.

Then Balkis--The Most Beautiful and Excellent Balkis--went forward
through the red lilies into the shade of the camphor-tree and laid
her hand upon Suleiman-bin-Daoud’s shoulder and said, ‘O my Lord and
Treasure of my Soul, rejoice, for we have taught the Queens of Egypt and
Ethiopia and Abyssinia and Persia and India and China with a great and a
memorable teaching.’

And Suleiman-bin-Daoud, still looking after the Butterflies where they
played in the sunlight, said, ‘O my Lady and Jewel of my Felicity, when
did this happen? For I have been jesting with a Butterfly ever since I
came into the garden.’ And he told Balkis what he had done.

Balkis--The tender and Most Lovely Balkis--said, ‘O my Lord and Regent
of my Existence, I hid behind the camphor-tree and saw it all. It was I
who told the Butterfly’s Wife to ask the Butterfly to stamp, because I
hoped that for the sake of the jest my Lord would make some great magic
and that the Queens would see it and be frightened.’ And she told him
what the Queens had said and seen and thought.

Then Suleiman-bin-Daoud rose up from his seat under the camphor-tree,
and stretched his arms and rejoiced and said, ‘O my Lady and Sweetener
of my Days, know that if I had made a magic against my Queens for the
sake of pride or anger, as I made that feast for all the animals, I
should certainly have been put to shame. But by means of your wisdom
I made the magic for the sake of a jest and for the sake of a little
Butterfly, and--behold--it has also delivered me from the vexations of
my vexatious wives! Tell me, therefore, O my Lady and Heart of my Heart,
how did you come to be so wise?’ And Balkis the Queen, beautiful and
tall, looked up into Suleiman-bin-Daoud’s eyes and put her head a little
on one side, just like the Butterfly, and said, ‘First, O my Lord,
because I loved you; and secondly, O my Lord, because I know what
women-folk are.’

Then they went up to the Palace and lived happily ever afterwards.

But wasn’t it clever of Balkis?


     THERE was never a Queen like Balkis,
       From here to the wide world’s end;
     But Balkis talked to a butterfly
       As you would talk to a friend.

     There was never a King like Solomon,
       Not since the world began;
     But Solomon talked to a butterfly
       As a man would talk to a man.

     She was Queen of Sabaea--
       And he was Asia’s Lord--
     But they both of ‘em talked to butterflies
       When they took their walks abroad!


HIGH above the city, on a tall column, stood the statue of the Happy
Prince.  He was gilded all over with thin leaves of fine gold, for eyes
he had two bright sapphires, and a large red ruby glowed on his
sword-hilt.

He was very much admired indeed.  “He is as beautiful as a weathercock,”
remarked one of the Town Councillors who wished to gain a reputation for
having artistic tastes; “only not quite so useful,” he added, fearing
lest people should think him unpractical, which he really was not.

“Why can’t you be like the Happy Prince?” asked a sensible mother of her
little boy who was crying for the moon.  “The Happy Prince never dreams
of crying for anything.”

“I am glad there is some one in the world who is quite happy,” muttered a
disappointed man as he gazed at the wonderful statue.

“He looks just like an angel,” said the Charity Children as they came out
of the cathedral in their bright scarlet cloaks and their clean white
pinafores.

“How do you know?” said the Mathematical Master, “you have never seen
one.”

“Ah! but we have, in our dreams,” answered the children; and the
Mathematical Master frowned and looked very severe, for he did not
approve of children dreaming.

One night there flew over the city a little Swallow.  His friends had
gone away to Egypt six weeks before, but he had stayed behind, for he was
in love with the most beautiful Reed.  He had met her early in the spring
as he was flying down the river after a big yellow moth, and had been so
attracted by her slender waist that he had stopped to talk to her.

“Shall I love you?” said the Swallow, who liked to come to the point at
once, and the Reed made him a low bow.  So he flew round and round her,
touching the water with his wings, and making silver ripples.  This was
his courtship, and it lasted all through the summer.

“It is a ridiculous attachment,” twittered the other Swallows; “she has
no money, and far too many relations”; and indeed the river was quite
full of Reeds.  Then, when the autumn came they all flew away.

After they had gone he felt lonely, and began to tire of his lady-love.
“She has no conversation,” he said, “and I am afraid that she is a
coquette, for she is always flirting with the wind.”  And certainly,
whenever the wind blew, the Reed made the most graceful curtseys.  “I
admit that she is domestic,” he continued, “but I love travelling, and my
wife, consequently, should love travelling also.”

“Will you come away with me?” he said finally to her; but the Reed shook
her head, she was so attached to her home.

“You have been trifling with me,” he cried.  “I am off to the Pyramids.
Good-bye!” and he flew away.

All day long he flew, and at night-time he arrived at the city.  “Where
shall I put up?” he said; “I hope the town has made preparations.”

Then he saw the statue on the tall column.

“I will put up there,” he cried; “it is a fine position, with plenty of
fresh air.”  So he alighted just between the feet of the Happy Prince.

“I have a golden bedroom,” he said softly to himself as he looked round,
and he prepared to go to sleep; but just as he was putting his head under
his wing a large drop of water fell on him.  “What a curious thing!” he
cried; “there is not a single cloud in the sky, the stars are quite clear
and bright, and yet it is raining.  The climate in the north of Europe is
really dreadful.  The Reed used to like the rain, but that was merely her
selfishness.”

Then another drop fell.

“What is the use of a statue if it cannot keep the rain off?” he said; “I
must look for a good chimney-pot,” and he determined to fly away.

But before he had opened his wings, a third drop fell, and he looked up,
and saw—Ah! what did he see?

The eyes of the Happy Prince were filled with tears, and tears were
running down his golden cheeks.  His face was so beautiful in the
moonlight that the little Swallow was filled with pity.

“Who are you?” he said.

“I am the Happy Prince.”

“Why are you weeping then?” asked the Swallow; “you have quite drenched
me.”

“When I was alive and had a human heart,” answered the statue, “I did not
know what tears were, for I lived in the Palace of Sans-Souci, where
sorrow is not allowed to enter.  In the daytime I played with my
companions in the garden, and in the evening I led the dance in the Great
Hall.  Round the garden ran a very lofty wall, but I never cared to ask
what lay beyond it, everything about me was so beautiful.  My courtiers
called me the Happy Prince, and happy indeed I was, if pleasure be
happiness.  So I lived, and so I died.  And now that I am dead they have
set me up here so high that I can see all the ugliness and all the misery
of my city, and though my heart is made of lead yet I cannot chose but
weep.”

“What! is he not solid gold?” said the Swallow to himself.  He was too
polite to make any personal remarks out loud.

“Far away,” continued the statue in a low musical voice, “far away in a
little street there is a poor house.  One of the windows is open, and
through it I can see a woman seated at a table.  Her face is thin and
worn, and she has coarse, red hands, all pricked by the needle, for she
is a seamstress.  She is embroidering passion-flowers on a satin gown for
the loveliest of the Queen’s maids-of-honour to wear at the next
Court-ball.  In a bed in the corner of the room her little boy is lying
ill.  He has a fever, and is asking for oranges.  His mother has nothing
to give him but river water, so he is crying.  Swallow, Swallow, little
Swallow, will you not bring her the ruby out of my sword-hilt?  My feet
are fastened to this pedestal and I cannot move.”

“I am waited for in Egypt,” said the Swallow.  “My friends are flying up
and down the Nile, and talking to the large lotus-flowers.  Soon they
will go to sleep in the tomb of the great King.  The King is there
himself in his painted coffin.  He is wrapped in yellow linen, and
embalmed with spices.  Round his neck is a chain of pale green jade, and
his hands are like withered leaves.”

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay
with me for one night, and be my messenger?  The boy is so thirsty, and
the mother so sad.”

“I don’t think I like boys,” answered the Swallow.  “Last summer, when I
was staying on the river, there were two rude boys, the miller’s sons,
who were always throwing stones at me.  They never hit me, of course; we
swallows fly far too well for that, and besides, I come of a family
famous for its agility; but still, it was a mark of disrespect.”

But the Happy Prince looked so sad that the little Swallow was sorry.
“It is very cold here,” he said; “but I will stay with you for one night,
and be your messenger.”

“Thank you, little Swallow,” said the Prince.

So the Swallow picked out the great ruby from the Prince’s sword, and
flew away with it in his beak over the roofs of the town.

He passed by the cathedral tower, where the white marble angels were
sculptured.  He passed by the palace and heard the sound of dancing.  A
beautiful girl came out on the balcony with her lover.  “How wonderful
the stars are,” he said to her, “and how wonderful is the power of love!”

“I hope my dress will be ready in time for the State-ball,” she answered;
“I have ordered passion-flowers to be embroidered on it; but the
seamstresses are so lazy.”

He passed over the river, and saw the lanterns hanging to the masts of
the ships.  He passed over the Ghetto, and saw the old Jews bargaining
with each other, and weighing out money in copper scales.  At last he
came to the poor house and looked in.  The boy was tossing feverishly on
his bed, and the mother had fallen asleep, she was so tired.  In he
hopped, and laid the great ruby on the table beside the woman’s thimble.
Then he flew gently round the bed, fanning the boy’s forehead with his
wings.  “How cool I feel,” said the boy, “I must be getting better”; and
he sank into a delicious slumber.

Then the Swallow flew back to the Happy Prince, and told him what he had
done.  “It is curious,” he remarked, “but I feel quite warm now, although
it is so cold.”

“That is because you have done a good action,” said the Prince.  And the
little Swallow began to think, and then he fell asleep.  Thinking always
made him sleepy.

When day broke he flew down to the river and had a bath.  “What a
remarkable phenomenon,” said the Professor of Ornithology as he was
passing over the bridge.  “A swallow in winter!”  And he wrote a long
letter about it to the local newspaper.  Every one quoted it, it was full
of so many words that they could not understand.

“To-night I go to Egypt,” said the Swallow, and he was in high spirits at
the prospect.  He visited all the public monuments, and sat a long time
on top of the church steeple.  Wherever he went the Sparrows chirruped,
and said to each other, “What a distinguished stranger!” so he enjoyed
himself very much.

When the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.  “Have you any
commissions for Egypt?” he cried; “I am just starting.”

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay
with me one night longer?”

“I am waited for in Egypt,” answered the Swallow.  “To-morrow my friends
will fly up to the Second Cataract.  The river-horse couches there among
the bulrushes, and on a great granite throne sits the God Memnon.  All
night long he watches the stars, and when the morning star shines he
utters one cry of joy, and then he is silent.  At noon the yellow lions
come down to the water’s edge to drink.  They have eyes like green
beryls, and their roar is louder than the roar of the cataract.”

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “far away across the
city I see a young man in a garret.  He is leaning over a desk covered
with papers, and in a tumbler by his side there is a bunch of withered
violets.  His hair is brown and crisp, and his lips are red as a
pomegranate, and he has large and dreamy eyes.  He is trying to finish a
play for the Director of the Theatre, but he is too cold to write any
more.  There is no fire in the grate, and hunger has made him faint.”

“I will wait with you one night longer,” said the Swallow, who really had
a good heart.  “Shall I take him another ruby?”

“Alas!  I have no ruby now,” said the Prince; “my eyes are all that I
have left.  They are made of rare sapphires, which were brought out of
India a thousand years ago.  Pluck out one of them and take it to him.
He will sell it to the jeweller, and buy food and firewood, and finish
his play.”

“Dear Prince,” said the Swallow, “I cannot do that”; and he began to
weep.

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “do as I command
you.”

So the Swallow plucked out the Prince’s eye, and flew away to the
student’s garret.  It was easy enough to get in, as there was a hole in
the roof.  Through this he darted, and came into the room.  The young man
had his head buried in his hands, so he did not hear the flutter of the
bird’s wings, and when he looked up he found the beautiful sapphire lying
on the withered violets.

“I am beginning to be appreciated,” he cried; “this is from some great
admirer.  Now I can finish my play,” and he looked quite happy.

The next day the Swallow flew down to the harbour.  He sat on the mast of
a large vessel and watched the sailors hauling big chests out of the hold
with ropes.  “Heave a-hoy!” they shouted as each chest came up.  “I am
going to Egypt”! cried the Swallow, but nobody minded, and when the moon
rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.

“I am come to bid you good-bye,” he cried.

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay
with me one night longer?”

“It is winter,” answered the Swallow, “and the chill snow will soon be
here.  In Egypt the sun is warm on the green palm-trees, and the
crocodiles lie in the mud and look lazily about them.  My companions are
building a nest in the Temple of Baalbec, and the pink and white doves
are watching them, and cooing to each other.  Dear Prince, I must leave
you, but I will never forget you, and next spring I will bring you back
two beautiful jewels in place of those you have given away.  The ruby
shall be redder than a red rose, and the sapphire shall be as blue as the
great sea.”

“In the square below,” said the Happy Prince, “there stands a little
match-girl.  She has let her matches fall in the gutter, and they are all
spoiled.  Her father will beat her if she does not bring home some money,
and she is crying.  She has no shoes or stockings, and her little head is
bare.  Pluck out my other eye, and give it to her, and her father will
not beat her.”

“I will stay with you one night longer,” said the Swallow, “but I cannot
pluck out your eye.  You would be quite blind then.”

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “do as I command
you.”

So he plucked out the Prince’s other eye, and darted down with it.  He
swooped past the match-girl, and slipped the jewel into the palm of her
hand.  “What a lovely bit of glass,” cried the little girl; and she ran
home, laughing.

Then the Swallow came back to the Prince.  “You are blind now,” he said,
“so I will stay with you always.”

“No, little Swallow,” said the poor Prince, “you must go away to Egypt.”

“I will stay with you always,” said the Swallow, and he slept at the
Prince’s feet.

All the next day he sat on the Prince’s shoulder, and told him stories of
what he had seen in strange lands.  He told him of the red ibises, who
stand in long rows on the banks of the Nile, and catch gold-fish in their
beaks; of the Sphinx, who is as old as the world itself, and lives in the
desert, and knows everything; of the merchants, who walk slowly by the
side of their camels, and carry amber beads in their hands; of the King
of the Mountains of the Moon, who is as black as ebony, and worships a
large crystal; of the great green snake that sleeps in a palm-tree, and
has twenty priests to feed it with honey-cakes; and of the pygmies who
sail over a big lake on large flat leaves, and are always at war with the
butterflies.

“Dear little Swallow,” said the Prince, “you tell me of marvellous
things, but more marvellous than anything is the suffering of men and of
women.  There is no Mystery so great as Misery.  Fly over my city, little
Swallow, and tell me what you see there.”

So the Swallow flew over the great city, and saw the rich making merry in
their beautiful houses, while the beggars were sitting at the gates.  He
flew into dark lanes, and saw the white faces of starving children
looking out listlessly at the black streets.  Under the archway of a
bridge two little boys were lying in one another’s arms to try and keep
themselves warm.  “How hungry we are!” they said.  “You must not lie
here,” shouted the Watchman, and they wandered out into the rain.

Then he flew back and told the Prince what he had seen.

“I am covered with fine gold,” said the Prince, “you must take it off,
leaf by leaf, and give it to my poor; the living always think that gold
can make them happy.”

Leaf after leaf of the fine gold the Swallow picked off, till the Happy
Prince looked quite dull and grey.  Leaf after leaf of the fine gold he
brought to the poor, and the children’s faces grew rosier, and they
laughed and played games in the street.  “We have bread now!” they cried.

Then the snow came, and after the snow came the frost.  The streets
looked as if they were made of silver, they were so bright and
glistening; long icicles like crystal daggers hung down from the eaves of
the houses, everybody went about in furs, and the little boys wore
scarlet caps and skated on the ice.

The poor little Swallow grew colder and colder, but he would not leave
the Prince, he loved him too well.  He picked up crumbs outside the
baker’s door when the baker was not looking and tried to keep himself
warm by flapping his wings.

But at last he knew that he was going to die.  He had just strength to
fly up to the Prince’s shoulder once more.  “Good-bye, dear Prince!” he
murmured, “will you let me kiss your hand?”

“I am glad that you are going to Egypt at last, little Swallow,” said the
Prince, “you have stayed too long here; but you must kiss me on the lips,
for I love you.”

“It is not to Egypt that I am going,” said the Swallow.  “I am going to
the House of Death.  Death is the brother of Sleep, is he not?”

And he kissed the Happy Prince on the lips, and fell down dead at his
feet.

At that moment a curious crack sounded inside the statue, as if something
had broken.  The fact is that the leaden heart had snapped right in two.
It certainly was a dreadfully hard frost.

Early the next morning the Mayor was walking in the square below in
company with the Town Councillors.  As they passed the column he looked
up at the statue: “Dear me! how shabby the Happy Prince looks!” he said.

“How shabby indeed!” cried the Town Councillors, who always agreed with
the Mayor; and they went up to look at it.

“The ruby has fallen out of his sword, his eyes are gone, and he is
golden no longer,” said the Mayor in fact, “he is litttle better than a
beggar!”

“Little better than a beggar,” said the Town Councillors.

“And here is actually a dead bird at his feet!” continued the Mayor.  “We
must really issue a proclamation that birds are not to be allowed to die
here.”  And the Town Clerk made a note of the suggestion.

So they pulled down the statue of the Happy Prince.  “As he is no longer
beautiful he is no longer useful,” said the Art Professor at the
University.

Then they melted the statue in a furnace, and the Mayor held a meeting of
the Corporation to decide what was to be done with the metal.  “We must
have another statue, of course,” he said, “and it shall be a statue of
myself.”

“Of myself,” said each of the Town Councillors, and they quarrelled.
When I last heard of them they were quarrelling still.

“What a strange thing!” said the overseer of the workmen at the foundry.
“This broken lead heart will not melt in the furnace.  We must throw it
away.”  So they threw it on a dust-heap where the dead Swallow was also
lying.

“Bring me the two most precious things in the city,” said God to one of
His Angels; and the Angel brought Him the leaden heart and the dead bird.

“You have rightly chosen,” said God, “for in my garden of Paradise this
little bird shall sing for evermore, and in my city of gold the Happy
Prince shall praise me.”

                [Picture: Decorative graphic of two birds]




The Nightingale and the Rose.


        [Picture: Decorative graphic of young man lying on grass]

“SHE said that she would dance with me if I brought her red roses,” cried
the young Student; “but in all my garden there is no red rose.”

From her nest in the holm-oak tree the Nightingale heard him, and she
looked out through the leaves, and wondered.

“No red rose in all my garden!” he cried, and his beautiful eyes filled
with tears.  “Ah, on what little things does happiness depend!  I have
read all that the wise men have written, and all the secrets of
philosophy are mine, yet for want of a red rose is my life made
wretched.”

“Here at last is a true lover,” said the Nightingale.  “Night after night
have I sung of him, though I knew him not: night after night have I told
his story to the stars, and now I see him.  His hair is dark as the
hyacinth-blossom, and his lips are red as the rose of his desire; but
passion has made his face like pale ivory, and sorrow has set her seal
upon his brow.”

“The Prince gives a ball to-morrow night,” murmured the young Student,
“and my love will be of the company.  If I bring her a red rose she will
dance with me till dawn.  If I bring her a red rose, I shall hold her in
my arms, and she will lean her head upon my shoulder, and her hand will
be clasped in mine.  But there is no red rose in my garden, so I shall
sit lonely, and she will pass me by.  She will have no heed of me, and my
heart will break.”

“Here indeed is the true lover,” said the Nightingale.  “What I sing of,
he suffers—what is joy to me, to him is pain.  Surely Love is a wonderful
thing.  It is more precious than emeralds, and dearer than fine opals.
Pearls and pomegranates cannot buy it, nor is it set forth in the
marketplace.  It may not be purchased of the merchants, nor can it be
weighed out in the balance for gold.”

“The musicians will sit in their gallery,” said the young Student, “and
play upon their stringed instruments, and my love will dance to the sound
of the harp and the violin.  She will dance so lightly that her feet will
not touch the floor, and the courtiers in their gay dresses will throng
round her.  But with me she will not dance, for I have no red rose to
give her”; and he flung himself down on the grass, and buried his face in
his hands, and wept.

“Why is he weeping?” asked a little Green Lizard, as he ran past him with
his tail in the air.

“Why, indeed?” said a Butterfly, who was fluttering about after a
sunbeam.

“Why, indeed?” whispered a Daisy to his neighbour, in a soft, low voice.

“He is weeping for a red rose,” said the Nightingale.

“For a red rose?” they cried; “how very ridiculous!” and the little
Lizard, who was something of a cynic, laughed outright.

But the Nightingale understood the secret of the Student’s sorrow, and
she sat silent in the oak-tree, and thought about the mystery of Love.

Suddenly she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.
She passed through the grove like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed
across the garden.

In the centre of the grass-plot was standing a beautiful Rose-tree, and
when she saw it she flew over to it, and lit upon a spray.

“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”

But the Tree shook its head.

“My roses are white,” it answered; “as white as the foam of the sea, and
whiter than the snow upon the mountain.  But go to my brother who grows
round the old sun-dial, and perhaps he will give you what you want.”

So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing round the
old sun-dial.

“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”

But the Tree shook its head.

“My roses are yellow,” it answered; “as yellow as the hair of the
mermaiden who sits upon an amber throne, and yellower than the daffodil
that blooms in the meadow before the mower comes with his scythe.  But go
to my brother who grows beneath the Student’s window, and perhaps he will
give you what you want.”

So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing beneath
the Student’s window.

“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”

But the Tree shook its head.

“My roses are red,” it answered, “as red as the feet of the dove, and
redder than the great fans of coral that wave and wave in the
ocean-cavern.  But the winter has chilled my veins, and the frost has
nipped my buds, and the storm has broken my branches, and I shall have no
roses at all this year.”

“One red rose is all I want,” cried the Nightingale, “only one red rose!
Is there no way by which I can get it?”

“There is a way,” answered the Tree; “but it is so terrible that I dare
not tell it to you.”

“Tell it to me,” said the Nightingale, “I am not afraid.”

“If you want a red rose,” said the Tree, “you must build it out of music
by moonlight, and stain it with your own heart’s-blood.  You must sing to
me with your breast against a thorn.  All night long you must sing to me,
and the thorn must pierce your heart, and your life-blood must flow into
my veins, and become mine.”

“Death is a great price to pay for a red rose,” cried the Nightingale,
“and Life is very dear to all.  It is pleasant to sit in the green wood,
and to watch the Sun in his chariot of gold, and the Moon in her chariot
of pearl.  Sweet is the scent of the hawthorn, and sweet are the
bluebells that hide in the valley, and the heather that blows on the
hill.  Yet Love is better than Life, and what is the heart of a bird
compared to the heart of a man?”

So she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.  She
swept over the garden like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed through
the grove.

The young Student was still lying on the grass, where she had left him,
and the tears were not yet dry in his beautiful eyes.

“Be happy,” cried the Nightingale, “be happy; you shall have your red
rose.  I will build it out of music by moonlight, and stain it with my
own heart’s-blood.  All that I ask of you in return is that you will be a
true lover, for Love is wiser than Philosophy, though she is wise, and
mightier than Power, though he is mighty.  Flame-coloured are his wings,
and coloured like flame is his body.  His lips are sweet as honey, and
his breath is like frankincense.”

The Student looked up from the grass, and listened, but he could not
understand what the Nightingale was saying to him, for he only knew the
things that are written down in books.

But the Oak-tree understood, and felt sad, for he was very fond of the
little Nightingale who had built her nest in his branches.

“Sing me one last song,” he whispered; “I shall feel very lonely when you
are gone.”

So the Nightingale sang to the Oak-tree, and her voice was like water
bubbling from a silver jar.

When she had finished her song the Student got up, and pulled a note-book
and a lead-pencil out of his pocket.

“She has form,” he said to himself, as he walked away through the
grove—“that cannot be denied to her; but has she got feeling?  I am
afraid not.  In fact, she is like most artists; she is all style, without
any sincerity.  She would not sacrifice herself for others.  She thinks
merely of music, and everybody knows that the arts are selfish.  Still,
it must be admitted that she has some beautiful notes in her voice.  What
a pity it is that they do not mean anything, or do any practical good.”
And he went into his room, and lay down on his little pallet-bed, and
began to think of his love; and, after a time, he fell asleep.

And when the Moon shone in the heavens the Nightingale flew to the
Rose-tree, and set her breast against the thorn.  All night long she sang
with her breast against the thorn, and the cold crystal Moon leaned down
and listened.  All night long she sang, and the thorn went deeper and
deeper into her breast, and her life-blood ebbed away from her.

She sang first of the birth of love in the heart of a boy and a girl.
And on the top-most spray of the Rose-tree there blossomed a marvellous
rose, petal following petal, as song followed song.  Pale was it, at
first, as the mist that hangs over the river—pale as the feet of the
morning, and silver as the wings of the dawn.  As the shadow of a rose in
a mirror of silver, as the shadow of a rose in a water-pool, so was the
rose that blossomed on the topmost spray of the Tree.

But the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
“Press closer, little Nightingale,” cried the Tree, “or the Day will come
before the rose is finished.”

So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and louder and
louder grew her song, for she sang of the birth of passion in the soul of
a man and a maid.

And a delicate flush of pink came into the leaves of the rose, like the
flush in the face of the bridegroom when he kisses the lips of the bride.
But the thorn had not yet reached her heart, so the rose’s heart remained
white, for only a Nightingale’s heart’s-blood can crimson the heart of a
rose.

And the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
“Press closer, little Nightingale,” cried the Tree, “or the Day will come
before the rose is finished.”

So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and the thorn
touched her heart, and a fierce pang of pain shot through her.  Bitter,
bitter was the pain, and wilder and wilder grew her song, for she sang of
the Love that is perfected by Death, of the Love that dies not in the
tomb.

And the marvellous rose became crimson, like the rose of the eastern sky.
Crimson was the girdle of petals, and crimson as a ruby was the heart.

But the Nightingale’s voice grew fainter, and her little wings began to
beat, and a film came over her eyes.  Fainter and fainter grew her song,
and she felt something choking her in her throat.

Then she gave one last burst of music.  The white Moon heard it, and she
forgot the dawn, and lingered on in the sky.  The red rose heard it, and
it trembled all over with ecstasy, and opened its petals to the cold
morning air.  Echo bore it to her purple cavern in the hills, and woke
the sleeping shepherds from their dreams.  It floated through the reeds
of the river, and they carried its message to the sea.

“Look, look!” cried the Tree, “the rose is finished now”; but the
Nightingale made no answer, for she was lying dead in the long grass,
with the thorn in her heart.

And at noon the Student opened his window and looked out.

“Why, what a wonderful piece of luck!” he cried; “here is a red rose!  I
have never seen any rose like it in all my life.  It is so beautiful that
I am sure it has a long Latin name”; and he leaned down and plucked it.

Then he put on his hat, and ran up to the Professor’s house with the rose
in his hand.

The daughter of the Professor was sitting in the doorway winding blue
silk on a reel, and her little dog was lying at her feet.

“You said that you would dance with me if I brought you a red rose,”
cried the Student.  “Here is the reddest rose in all the world.  You will
wear it to-night next your heart, and as we dance together it will tell
you how I love you.”

But the girl frowned.

“I am afraid it will not go with my dress,” she answered; “and, besides,
the Chamberlain’s nephew has sent me some real jewels, and everybody
knows that jewels cost far more than flowers.”

“Well, upon my word, you are very ungrateful,” said the Student angrily;
and he threw the rose into the street, where it fell into the gutter, and
a cart-wheel went over it.

“Ungrateful!” said the girl.  “I tell you what, you are very rude; and,
after all, who are you?  Only a Student.  Why, I don’t believe you have
even got silver buckles to your shoes as the Chamberlain’s nephew has”;
and she got up from her chair and went into the house.

“What a silly thing Love is,” said the Student as he walked away.  “It
is not half as useful as Logic, for it does not prove anything, and it is
always telling one of things that are not going to happen, and making one
believe things that are not true.  In fact, it is quite unpractical, and,
as in this age to be practical is everything, I shall go back to
Philosophy and study Metaphysics.”

So he returned to his room and pulled out a great dusty book, and began
to read.

          [Picture: Decorative graphic of nightingale and rose]




The Selfish Giant.


                       [Picture: The Selfish Giant]

EVERY afternoon, as they were coming from school, the children used to go
and play in the Giant’s garden.

It was a large lovely garden, with soft green grass.  Here and there over
the grass stood beautiful flowers like stars, and there were twelve
peach-trees that in the spring-time broke out into delicate blossoms of
pink and pearl, and in the autumn bore rich fruit.  The birds sat on the
trees and sang so sweetly that the children used to stop their games in
order to listen to them.  “How happy we are here!” they cried to each
other.

           [Picture: Decorative graphic of children in garden]

One day the Giant came back.  He had been to visit his friend the Cornish
ogre, and had stayed with him for seven years.  After the seven years
were over he had said all that he had to say, for his conversation was
limited, and he determined to return to his own castle.  When he arrived
he saw the children playing in the garden.

“What are you doing here?” he cried in a very gruff voice, and the
children ran away.

“My own garden is my own garden,” said the Giant; “any one can understand
that, and I will allow nobody to play in it but myself.”  So he built a
high wall all round it, and put up a notice-board.

          TRESPASSERS

            WILL BE

           PROSECUTED

He was a very selfish Giant.

The poor children had now nowhere to play.  They tried to play on the
road, but the road was very dusty and full of hard stones, and they did
not like it.  They used to wander round the high wall when their lessons
were over, and talk about the beautiful garden inside.  “How happy we
were there,” they said to each other.

Then the Spring came, and all over the country there were little blossoms
and little birds.  Only in the garden of the Selfish Giant it was still
winter.  The birds did not care to sing in it as there were no children,
and the trees forgot to blossom.  Once a beautiful flower put its head
out from the grass, but when it saw the notice-board it was so sorry for
the children that it slipped back into the ground again, and went off to
sleep.  The only people who were pleased were the Snow and the Frost.
“Spring has forgotten this garden,” they cried, “so we will live here all
the year round.”  The Snow covered up the grass with her great white
cloak, and the Frost painted all the trees silver.  Then they invited the
North Wind to stay with them, and he came.  He was wrapped in furs, and
he roared all day about the garden, and blew the chimney-pots down.
“This is a delightful spot,” he said, “we must ask the Hail on a visit.”
So the Hail came.  Every day for three hours he rattled on the roof of
the castle till he broke most of the slates, and then he ran round and
round the garden as fast as he could go.  He was dressed in grey, and his
breath was like ice.

“I cannot understand why the Spring is so late in coming,” said the
Selfish Giant, as he sat at the window and looked out at his cold white
garden; “I hope there will be a change in the weather.”

But the Spring never came, nor the Summer.  The Autumn gave golden fruit
to every garden, but to the Giant’s garden she gave none.  “He is too
selfish,” she said.  So it was always Winter there, and the North Wind,
and the Hail, and the Frost, and the Snow danced about through the trees.

One morning the Giant was lying awake in bed when he heard some lovely
music.  It sounded so sweet to his ears that he thought it must be the
King’s musicians passing by.  It was really only a little linnet singing
outside his window, but it was so long since he had heard a bird sing in
his garden that it seemed to him to be the most beautiful music in the
world.  Then the Hail stopped dancing over his head, and the North Wind
ceased roaring, and a delicious perfume came to him through the open
casement.  “I believe the Spring has come at last,” said the Giant; and
he jumped out of bed and looked out.

What did he see?

He saw a most wonderful sight.  Through a little hole in the wall the
children had crept in, and they were sitting in the branches of the
trees.  In every tree that he could see there was a little child.  And
the trees were so glad to have the children back again that they had
covered themselves with blossoms, and were waving their arms gently above
the children’s heads.  The birds were flying about and twittering with
delight, and the flowers were looking up through the green grass and
laughing.  It was a lovely scene, only in one corner it was still winter.
It was the farthest corner of the garden, and in it was standing a little
boy.  He was so small that he could not reach up to the branches of the
tree, and he was wandering all round it, crying bitterly.  The poor tree
was still quite covered with frost and snow, and the North Wind was
blowing and roaring above it.  “Climb up! little boy,” said the Tree, and
it bent its branches down as low as it could; but the boy was too tiny.

And the Giant’s heart melted as he looked out.  “How selfish I have
been!” he said; “now I know why the Spring would not come here.  I will
put that poor little boy on the top of the tree, and then I will knock
down the wall, and my garden shall be the children’s playground for ever
and ever.”  He was really very sorry for what he had done.

So he crept downstairs and opened the front door quite softly, and went
out into the garden.  But when the children saw him they were so
frightened that they all ran away, and the garden became winter again.
Only the little boy did not run, for his eyes were so full of tears that
he did not see the Giant coming.  And the Giant stole up behind him and
took him gently in his hand, and put him up into the tree.  And the tree
broke at once into blossom, and the birds came and sang on it, and the
little boy stretched out his two arms and flung them round the Giant’s
neck, and kissed him.  And the other children, when they saw that the
Giant was not wicked any longer, came running back, and with them came
the Spring.  “It is your garden now, little children,” said the Giant,
and he took a great axe and knocked down the wall.  And when the people
were going to market at twelve o’clock they found the Giant playing with
the children in the most beautiful garden they had ever seen.

All day long they played, and in the evening they came to the Giant to
bid him good-bye.

“But where is your little companion?” he said: “the boy I put into the
tree.”  The Giant loved him the best because he had kissed him.

“We don’t know,” answered the children; “he has gone away.”

“You must tell him to be sure and come here to-morrow,” said the Giant.
But the children said that they did not know where he lived, and had
never seen him before; and the Giant felt very sad.

Every afternoon, when school was over, the children came and played with
the Giant.  But the little boy whom the Giant loved was never seen again.
The Giant was very kind to all the children, yet he longed for his first
little friend, and often spoke of him.  “How I would like to see him!” he
used to say.

Years went over, and the Giant grew very old and feeble.  He could not
play about any more, so he sat in a huge armchair, and watched the
children at their games, and admired his garden.  “I have many beautiful
flowers,” he said; “but the children are the most beautiful flowers of
all.”

One winter morning he looked out of his window as he was dressing.  He
did not hate the Winter now, for he knew that it was merely the Spring
asleep, and that the flowers were resting.

Suddenly he rubbed his eyes in wonder, and looked and looked.  It
certainly was a marvellous sight.  In the farthest corner of the garden
was a tree quite covered with lovely white blossoms.  Its branches were
all golden, and silver fruit hung down from them, and underneath it stood
the little boy he had loved.

Downstairs ran the Giant in great joy, and out into the garden.  He
hastened across the grass, and came near to the child.  And when he came
quite close his face grew red with anger, and he said, “Who hath dared to
wound thee?”  For on the palms of the child’s hands were the prints of
two nails, and the prints of two nails were on the little feet.

“Who hath dared to wound thee?” cried the Giant; “tell me, that I may
take my big sword and slay him.”

“Nay!” answered the child; “but these are the wounds of Love.”

“Who art thou?” said the Giant, and a strange awe fell on him, and he
knelt before the little child.

And the child smiled on the Giant, and said to him, “You let me play once
in your garden, to-day you shall come with me to my garden, which is
Paradise.”

And when the children ran in that afternoon, they found the Giant lying
dead under the tree, all covered with white blossoms.

                 [Picture: Decorative graphic of wreath]




The Devoted Friend.


                      [Picture: Hans and the Miller]

ONE morning the old Water-rat put his head out of his hole.  He had
bright beady eyes and stiff grey whiskers and his tail was like a long
bit of black india-rubber.  The little ducks were swimming about in the
pond, looking just like a lot of yellow canaries, and their mother, who
was pure white with real red legs, was trying to teach them how to stand
on their heads in the water.

“You will never be in the best society unless you can stand on your
heads,” she kept saying to them; and every now and then she showed them
how it was done.  But the little ducks paid no attention to her.  They
were so young that they did not know what an advantage it is to be in
society at all.

“What disobedient children!” cried the old Water-rat; “they really
deserve to be drowned.”

“Nothing of the kind,” answered the Duck, “every one must make a
beginning, and parents cannot be too patient.”

“Ah! I know nothing about the feelings of parents,” said the Water-rat;
“I am not a family man.  In fact, I have never been married, and I never
intend to be.  Love is all very well in its way, but friendship is much
higher.  Indeed, I know of nothing in the world that is either nobler or
rarer than a devoted friendship.”

“And what, pray, is your idea of the duties of a devoted friend?” asked a
Green Linnet, who was sitting in a willow-tree hard by, and had overheard
the conversation.

“Yes, that is just what I want to know,” said the Duck; and she swam away
to the end of the pond, and stood upon her head, in order to give her
children a good example.

“What a silly question!” cried the Water-rat.  “I should expect my
devoted friend to be devoted to me, of course.”

“And what would you do in return?” said the little bird, swinging upon a
silver spray, and flapping his tiny wings.

“I don’t understand you,” answered the Water-rat.

“Let me tell you a story on the subject,” said the Linnet.

“Is the story about me?” asked the Water-rat.  “If so, I will listen to
it, for I am extremely fond of fiction.”

“It is applicable to you,” answered the Linnet; and he flew down, and
alighting upon the bank, he told the story of The Devoted Friend.

“Once upon a time,” said the Linnet, “there was an honest little fellow
named Hans.”

“Was he very distinguished?” asked the Water-rat.

“No,” answered the Linnet, “I don’t think he was distinguished at all,
except for his kind heart, and his funny round good-humoured face.  He
lived in a tiny cottage all by himself, and every day he worked in his
garden.  In all the country-side there was no garden so lovely as his.
Sweet-william grew there, and Gilly-flowers, and Shepherds’-purses, and
Fair-maids of France.  There were damask Roses, and yellow Roses, lilac
Crocuses, and gold, purple Violets and white.  Columbine and Ladysmock,
Marjoram and Wild Basil, the Cowslip and the Flower-de-luce, the Daffodil
and the Clove-Pink bloomed or blossomed in their proper order as the
months went by, one flower taking another flower’s place, so that there
were always beautiful things to look at, and pleasant odours to smell.

“Little Hans had a great many friends, but the most devoted friend of all
was big Hugh the Miller.  Indeed, so devoted was the rich Miller to
little Hans, that he would never go by his garden without leaning over
the wall and plucking a large nosegay, or a handful of sweet herbs, or
filling his pockets with plums and cherries if it was the fruit season.

“‘Real friends should have everything in common,’ the Miller used to say,
and little Hans nodded and smiled, and felt very proud of having a friend
with such noble ideas.

“Sometimes, indeed, the neighbours thought it strange that the rich
Miller never gave little Hans anything in return, though he had a hundred
sacks of flour stored away in his mill, and six milch cows, and a large
flock of woolly sheep; but Hans never troubled his head about these
things, and nothing gave him greater pleasure than to listen to all the
wonderful things the Miller used to say about the unselfishness of true
friendship.

“So little Hans worked away in his garden.  During the spring, the
summer, and the autumn he was very happy, but when the winter came, and
he had no fruit or flowers to bring to the market, he suffered a good
deal from cold and hunger, and often had to go to bed without any supper
but a few dried pears or some hard nuts.  In the winter, also, he was
extremely lonely, as the Miller never came to see him then.

“‘There is no good in my going to see little Hans as long as the snow
lasts,’ the Miller used to say to his wife, ‘for when people are in
trouble they should be left alone, and not be bothered by visitors.  That
at least is my idea about friendship, and I am sure I am right.  So I
shall wait till the spring comes, and then I shall pay him a visit, and
he will be able to give me a large basket of primroses and that will make
him so happy.’

“‘You are certainly very thoughtful about others,’ answered the Wife, as
she sat in her comfortable armchair by the big pinewood fire; ‘very
thoughtful indeed.  It is quite a treat to hear you talk about
friendship.  I am sure the clergyman himself could not say such beautiful
things as you do, though he does live in a three-storied house, and wear
a gold ring on his little finger.’

“‘But could we not ask little Hans up here?’ said the Miller’s youngest
son.  ‘If poor Hans is in trouble I will give him half my porridge, and
show him my white rabbits.’

“‘What a silly boy you are!’ cried the Miller; ‘I really don’t know what
is the use of sending you to school.  You seem not to learn anything.
Why, if little Hans came up here, and saw our warm fire, and our good
supper, and our great cask of red wine, he might get envious, and envy is
a most terrible thing, and would spoil anybody’s nature.  I certainly
will not allow Hans’ nature to be spoiled.  I am his best friend, and I
will always watch over him, and see that he is not led into any
temptations.  Besides, if Hans came here, he might ask me to let him have
some flour on credit, and that I could not do.  Flour is one thing, and
friendship is another, and they should not be confused.  Why, the words
are spelt differently, and mean quite different things.  Everybody can
see that.’

“‘How well you talk!’ said the Miller’s Wife, pouring herself out a large
glass of warm ale; ‘really I feel quite drowsy.  It is just like being in
church.’

“‘Lots of people act well,’ answered the Miller; ‘but very few people
talk well, which shows that talking is much the more difficult thing of
the two, and much the finer thing also’; and he looked sternly across the
table at his little son, who felt so ashamed of himself that he hung his
head down, and grew quite scarlet, and began to cry into his tea.
However, he was so young that you must excuse him.”

“Is that the end of the story?” asked the Water-rat.

“Certainly not,” answered the Linnet, “that is the beginning.”

“Then you are quite behind the age,” said the Water-rat.  “Every good
story-teller nowadays starts with the end, and then goes on to the
beginning, and concludes with the middle.  That is the new method.  I
heard all about it the other day from a critic who was walking round the
pond with a young man.  He spoke of the matter at great length, and I am
sure he must have been right, for he had blue spectacles and a bald head,
and whenever the young man made any remark, he always answered ‘Pooh!’
But pray go on with your story.  I like the Miller immensely.  I have all
kinds of beautiful sentiments myself, so there is a great sympathy
between us.”

“Well,” said the Linnet, hopping now on one leg and now on the other, “as
soon as the winter was over, and the primroses began to open their pale
yellow stars, the Miller said to his wife that he would go down and see
little Hans.

“‘Why, what a good heart you have!’ cried his Wife; ‘you are always
thinking of others.  And mind you take the big basket with you for the
flowers.’

“So the Miller tied the sails of the windmill together with a strong iron
chain, and went down the hill with the basket on his arm.

“‘Good morning, little Hans,’ said the Miller.

“‘Good morning,’ said Hans, leaning on his spade, and smiling from ear to
ear.

“‘And how have you been all the winter?’ said the Miller.

“‘Well, really,’ cried Hans, ‘it is very good of you to ask, very good
indeed.  I am afraid I had rather a hard time of it, but now the spring
has come, and I am quite happy, and all my flowers are doing well.’

“‘We often talked of you during the winter, Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘and
wondered how you were getting on.’

“‘That was kind of you,’ said Hans; ‘I was half afraid you had forgotten
me.’

“‘Hans, I am surprised at you,’ said the Miller; ‘friendship never
forgets.  That is the wonderful thing about it, but I am afraid you don’t
understand the poetry of life.  How lovely your primroses are looking,
by-the-bye!”

“‘They are certainly very lovely,’ said Hans, ‘and it is a most lucky
thing for me that I have so many.  I am going to bring them into the
market and sell them to the Burgomaster’s daughter, and buy back my
wheelbarrow with the money.’

“‘Buy back your wheelbarrow?  You don’t mean to say you have sold it?
What a very stupid thing to do!’

“‘Well, the fact is,’ said Hans, ‘that I was obliged to.  You see the
winter was a very bad time for me, and I really had no money at all to
buy bread with.  So I first sold the silver buttons off my Sunday coat,
and then I sold my silver chain, and then I sold my big pipe, and at last
I sold my wheelbarrow.  But I am going to buy them all back again now.’

“‘Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘I will give you my wheelbarrow.  It is not in
very good repair; indeed, one side is gone, and there is something wrong
with the wheel-spokes; but in spite of that I will give it to you.  I
know it is very generous of me, and a great many people would think me
extremely foolish for parting with it, but I am not like the rest of the
world.  I think that generosity is the essence of friendship, and,
besides, I have got a new wheelbarrow for myself.  Yes, you may set your
mind at ease, I will give you my wheelbarrow.’

“‘Well, really, that is generous of you,’ said little Hans, and his funny
round face glowed all over with pleasure.  ‘I can easily put it in
repair, as I have a plank of wood in the house.’

“‘A plank of wood!’ said the Miller; ‘why, that is just what I want for
the roof of my barn.  There is a very large hole in it, and the corn will
all get damp if I don’t stop it up.  How lucky you mentioned it!  It is
quite remarkable how one good action always breeds another.  I have given
you my wheelbarrow, and now you are going to give me your plank.  Of
course, the wheelbarrow is worth far more than the plank, but true,
friendship never notices things like that.  Pray get it at once, and I
will set to work at my barn this very day.’

“‘Certainly,’ cried little Hans, and he ran into the shed and dragged the
plank out.

“‘It is not a very big plank,’ said the Miller, looking at it, ‘and I am
afraid that after I have mended my barn-roof there won’t be any left for
you to mend the wheelbarrow with; but, of course, that is not my fault.
And now, as I have given you my wheelbarrow, I am sure you would like to
give me some flowers in return.  Here is the basket, and mind you fill it
quite full.’

“‘Quite full?’ said little Hans, rather sorrowfully, for it was really a
very big basket, and he knew that if he filled it he would have no
flowers left for the market and he was very anxious to get his silver
buttons back.

“‘Well, really,’ answered the Miller, ‘as I have given you my
wheelbarrow, I don’t think that it is much to ask you for a few flowers.
I may be wrong, but I should have thought that friendship, true
friendship, was quite free from selfishness of any kind.’

“‘My dear friend, my best friend,’ cried little Hans, ‘you are welcome to
all the flowers in my garden.  I would much sooner have your good opinion
than my silver buttons, any day’; and he ran and plucked all his pretty
primroses, and filled the Miller’s basket.

“‘Good-bye, little Hans,’ said the Miller, as he went up the hill with
the plank on his shoulder, and the big basket in his hand.

“‘Good-bye,’ said little Hans, and he began to dig away quite merrily, he
was so pleased about the wheelbarrow.

“The next day he was nailing up some honeysuckle against the porch, when
he heard the Miller’s voice calling to him from the road.  So he jumped
off the ladder, and ran down the garden, and looked over the wall.

“There was the Miller with a large sack of flour on his back.

“‘Dear little Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘would you mind carrying this sack
of flour for me to market?’

“‘Oh, I am so sorry,’ said Hans, ‘but I am really very busy to-day.  I
have got all my creepers to nail up, and all my flowers to water, and all
my grass to roll.’

“‘Well, really,’ said the Miller, ‘I think that, considering that I am
going to give you my wheelbarrow, it is rather unfriendly of you to
refuse.’

“‘Oh, don’t say that,’ cried little Hans, ‘I wouldn’t be unfriendly for
the whole world’; and he ran in for his cap, and trudged off with the big
sack on his shoulders.

“It was a very hot day, and the road was terribly dusty, and before Hans
had reached the sixth milestone he was so tired that he had to sit down
and rest.  However, he went on bravely, and as last he reached the
market.  After he had waited there some time, he sold the sack of flour
for a very good price, and then he returned home at once, for he was
afraid that if he stopped too late he might meet some robbers on the way.

“‘It has certainly been a hard day,’ said little Hans to himself as he
was going to bed, ‘but I am glad I did not refuse the Miller, for he is
my best friend, and, besides, he is going to give me his wheelbarrow.’

“Early the next morning the Miller came down to get the money for his
sack of flour, but little Hans was so tired that he was still in bed.

“‘Upon my word,’ said the Miller, ‘you are very lazy.  Really,
considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, I think you might
work harder.  Idleness is a great sin, and I certainly don’t like any of
my friends to be idle or sluggish.  You must not mind my speaking quite
plainly to you.  Of course I should not dream of doing so if I were not
your friend.  But what is the good of friendship if one cannot say
exactly what one means?  Anybody can say charming things and try to
please and to flatter, but a true friend always says unpleasant things,
and does not mind giving pain.  Indeed, if he is a really true friend he
prefers it, for he knows that then he is doing good.’

“‘I am very sorry,’ said little Hans, rubbing his eyes and pulling off
his night-cap, ‘but I was so tired that I thought I would lie in bed for
a little time, and listen to the birds singing.  Do you know that I
always work better after hearing the birds sing?’

“‘Well, I am glad of that,’ said the Miller, clapping little Hans on the
back, ‘for I want you to come up to the mill as soon as you are dressed,
and mend my barn-roof for me.’

“Poor little Hans was very anxious to go and work in his garden, for his
flowers had not been watered for two days, but he did not like to refuse
the Miller, as he was such a good friend to him.

“‘Do you think it would be unfriendly of me if I said I was busy?’ he
inquired in a shy and timid voice.

“‘Well, really,’ answered the Miller, ‘I do not think it is much to ask
of you, considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow; but of
course if you refuse I will go and do it myself.’

“‘Oh! on no account,’ cried little Hans and he jumped out of bed, and
dressed himself, and went up to the barn.

“He worked there all day long, till sunset, and at sunset the Miller came
to see how he was getting on.

“‘Have you mended the hole in the roof yet, little Hans?’ cried the
Miller in a cheery voice.

“‘It is quite mended,’ answered little Hans, coming down the ladder.

“‘Ah!’ said the Miller, ‘there is no work so delightful as the work one
does for others.’

“‘It is certainly a great privilege to hear you talk,’ answered little
Hans, sitting down, and wiping his forehead, ‘a very great privilege.
But I am afraid I shall never have such beautiful ideas as you have.’

“‘Oh! they will come to you,’ said the Miller, ‘but you must take more
pains.  At present you have only the practice of friendship; some day you
will have the theory also.’

“‘Do you really think I shall?’ asked little Hans.

“‘I have no doubt of it,’ answered the Miller, ‘but now that you have
mended the roof, you had better go home and rest, for I want you to drive
my sheep to the mountain to-morrow.’

“Poor little Hans was afraid to say anything to this, and early the next
morning the Miller brought his sheep round to the cottage, and Hans
started off with them to the mountain.  It took him the whole day to get
there and back; and when he returned he was so tired that he went off to
sleep in his chair, and did not wake up till it was broad daylight.

“‘What a delightful time I shall have in my garden,’ he said, and he went
to work at once.

“But somehow he was never able to look after his flowers at all, for his
friend the Miller was always coming round and sending him off on long
errands, or getting him to help at the mill.  Little Hans was very much
distressed at times, as he was afraid his flowers would think he had
forgotten them, but he consoled himself by the reflection that the Miller
was his best friend.  ‘Besides,’ he used to say, ‘he is going to give me
his wheelbarrow, and that is an act of pure generosity.’

“So little Hans worked away for the Miller, and the Miller said all kinds
of beautiful things about friendship, which Hans took down in a
note-book, and used to read over at night, for he was a very good
scholar.

“Now it happened that one evening little Hans was sitting by his fireside
when a loud rap came at the door.  It was a very wild night, and the wind
was blowing and roaring round the house so terribly that at first he
thought it was merely the storm.  But a second rap came, and then a
third, louder than any of the others.

“‘It is some poor traveller,’ said little Hans to himself, and he ran to
the door.

“There stood the Miller with a lantern in one hand and a big stick in the
other.

“‘Dear little Hans,’ cried the Miller, ‘I am in great trouble.  My little
boy has fallen off a ladder and hurt himself, and I am going for the
Doctor.  But he lives so far away, and it is such a bad night, that it
has just occurred to me that it would be much better if you went instead
of me.  You know I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, and so, it is
only fair that you should do something for me in return.’

“‘Certainly,’ cried little Hans, ‘I take it quite as a compliment your
coming to me, and I will start off at once.  But you must lend me your
lantern, as the night is so dark that I am afraid I might fall into the
ditch.’

“‘I am very sorry,’ answered the Miller, ‘but it is my new lantern, and
it would be a great loss to me if anything happened to it.’

“‘Well, never mind, I will do without it,’ cried little Hans, and he took
down his great fur coat, and his warm scarlet cap, and tied a muffler
round his throat, and started off.

“What a dreadful storm it was!  The night was so black that little Hans
could hardly see, and the wind was so strong that he could scarcely
stand.  However, he was very courageous, and after he had been walking
about three hours, he arrived at the Doctor’s house, and knocked at the
door.

“‘Who is there?’ cried the Doctor, putting his head out of his bedroom
window.

“‘Little Hans, Doctor.’

“’What do you want, little Hans?’

“‘The Miller’s son has fallen from a ladder, and has hurt himself, and
the Miller wants you to come at once.’

“‘All right!’ said the Doctor; and he ordered his horse, and his big
boots, and his lantern, and came downstairs, and rode off in the
direction of the Miller’s house, little Hans trudging behind him.

“But the storm grew worse and worse, and the rain fell in torrents, and
little Hans could not see where he was going, or keep up with the horse.
At last he lost his way, and wandered off on the moor, which was a very
dangerous place, as it was full of deep holes, and there poor little Hans
was drowned.  His body was found the next day by some goatherds, floating
in a great pool of water, and was brought back by them to the cottage.

“Everybody went to little Hans’ funeral, as he was so popular, and the
Miller was the chief mourner.

“‘As I was his best friend,’ said the Miller, ‘it is only fair that I
should have the best place’; so he walked at the head of the procession
in a long black cloak, and every now and then he wiped his eyes with a
big pocket-handkerchief.

“‘Little Hans is certainly a great loss to every one,’ said the
Blacksmith, when the funeral was over, and they were all seated
comfortably in the inn, drinking spiced wine and eating sweet cakes.

“‘A great loss to me at any rate,’ answered the Miller; ‘why, I had as
good as given him my wheelbarrow, and now I really don’t know what to do
with it.  It is very much in my way at home, and it is in such bad repair
that I could not get anything for it if I sold it.  I will certainly take
care not to give away anything again.  One always suffers for being
generous.’”

“Well?” said the Water-rat, after a long pause.

“Well, that is the end,” said the Linnet.

“But what became of the Miller?” asked the Water-rat.

“Oh!  I really don’t know,” replied the Linnet; “and I am sure that I
don’t care.”

“It is quite evident then that you have no sympathy in your nature,” said
the Water-rat.

“I am afraid you don’t quite see the moral of the story,” remarked the
Linnet.

“The what?” screamed the Water-rat.

“The moral.”

“Do you mean to say that the story has a moral?”

“Certainly,” said the Linnet.

“Well, really,” said the Water-rat, in a very angry manner, “I think you
should have told me that before you began.  If you had done so, I
certainly would not have listened to you; in fact, I should have said
‘Pooh,’ like the critic.  However, I can say it now”; so he shouted out
“Pooh” at the top of his voice, gave a whisk with his tail, and went back
into his hole.

“And how do you like the Water-rat?” asked the Duck, who came paddling up
some minutes afterwards.  “He has a great many good points, but for my
own part I have a mother’s feelings, and I can never look at a confirmed
bachelor without the tears coming into my eyes.”

“I am rather afraid that I have annoyed him,” answered the Linnet.  “The
fact is, that I told him a story with a moral.”

“Ah! that is always a very dangerous thing to do,” said the Duck.

And I quite agree with her.

     [Picture: Decorative graphic of windmill and overturned barrow]




The Remarkable Rocket.


                     [Picture: The Remarkable Rocket]

THE King’s son was going to be married, so there were general rejoicings.
He had waited a whole year for his bride, and at last she had arrived.
She was a Russian Princess, and had driven all the way from Finland in a
sledge drawn by six reindeer.  The sledge was shaped like a great golden
swan, and between the swan’s wings lay the little Princess herself.  Her
long ermine-cloak reached right down to her feet, on her head was a tiny
cap of silver tissue, and she was as pale as the Snow Palace in which she
had always lived.  So pale was she that as she drove through the streets
all the people wondered.  “She is like a white rose!” they cried, and
they threw down flowers on her from the balconies.

  [Picture: Decorative graphic of young man kissing the princess’ hand]

At the gate of the Castle the Prince was waiting to receive her.  He had
dreamy violet eyes, and his hair was like fine gold.  When he saw her he
sank upon one knee, and kissed her hand.

“Your picture was beautiful,” he murmured, “but you are more beautiful
than your picture”; and the little Princess blushed.

“She was like a white rose before,” said a young Page to his neighbour,
“but she is like a red rose now”; and the whole Court was delighted.

For the next three days everybody went about saying, “White rose, Red
rose, Red rose, White rose”; and the King gave orders that the Page’s
salary was to be doubled.  As he received no salary at all this was not
of much use to him, but it was considered a great honour, and was duly
published in the Court Gazette.

When the three days were over the marriage was celebrated.  It was a
magnificent ceremony, and the bride and bridegroom walked hand in hand
under a canopy of purple velvet embroidered with little pearls.  Then
there was a State Banquet, which lasted for five hours.  The Prince and
Princess sat at the top of the Great Hall and drank out of a cup of clear
crystal.  Only true lovers could drink out of this cup, for if false lips
touched it, it grew grey and dull and cloudy.

“It’s quite clear that they love each other,” said the little Page, “as
clear as crystal!” and the King doubled his salary a second time.  “What
an honour!” cried all the courtiers.

After the banquet there was to be a Ball.  The bride and bridegroom were
to dance the Rose-dance together, and the King had promised to play the
flute.  He played very badly, but no one had ever dared to tell him so,
because he was the King.  Indeed, he knew only two airs, and was never
quite certain which one he was playing; but it made no matter, for,
whatever he did, everybody cried out, “Charming! charming!”

The last item on the programme was a grand display of fireworks, to be
let off exactly at midnight.  The little Princess had never seen a
firework in her life, so the King had given orders that the Royal
Pyrotechnist should be in attendance on the day of her marriage.

“What are fireworks like?” she had asked the Prince, one morning, as she
was walking on the terrace.

“They are like the Aurora Borealis,” said the King, who always answered
questions that were addressed to other people, “only much more natural.
I prefer them to stars myself, as you always know when they are going to
appear, and they are as delightful as my own flute-playing.  You must
certainly see them.”

So at the end of the King’s garden a great stand had been set up, and as
soon as the Royal Pyrotechnist had put everything in its proper place,
the fireworks began to talk to each other.

“The world is certainly very beautiful,” cried a little Squib.  “Just
look at those yellow tulips.  Why! if they were real crackers they could
not be lovelier.  I am very glad I have travelled.  Travel improves the
mind wonderfully, and does away with all one’s prejudices.”

“The King’s garden is not the world, you foolish squib,” said a big Roman
Candle; “the world is an enormous place, and it would take you three days
to see it thoroughly.”

“Any place you love is the world to you,” exclaimed a pensive Catherine
Wheel, who had been attached to an old deal box in early life, and prided
herself on her broken heart; “but love is not fashionable any more, the
poets have killed it.  They wrote so much about it that nobody believed
them, and I am not surprised.  True love suffers, and is silent.  I
remember myself once—But it is no matter now.  Romance is a thing of the
past.”

“Nonsense!” said the Roman Candle, “Romance never dies.  It is like the
moon, and lives for ever.  The bride and bridegroom, for instance, love
each other very dearly.  I heard all about them this morning from a
brown-paper cartridge, who happened to be staying in the same drawer as
myself, and knew the latest Court news.”

But the Catherine Wheel shook her head.  “Romance is dead, Romance is
dead, Romance is dead,” she murmured.  She was one of those people who
think that, if you say the same thing over and over a great many times,
it becomes true in the end.

Suddenly, a sharp, dry cough was heard, and they all looked round.

It came from a tall, supercilious-looking Rocket, who was tied to the end
of a long stick.  He always coughed before he made any observation, so as
to attract attention.

“Ahem! ahem!” he said, and everybody listened except the poor Catherine
Wheel, who was still shaking her head, and murmuring, “Romance is dead.”

“Order! order!” cried out a Cracker.  He was something of a politician,
and had always taken a prominent part in the local elections, so he knew
the proper Parliamentary expressions to use.

“Quite dead,” whispered the Catherine Wheel, and she went off to sleep.

As soon as there was perfect silence, the Rocket coughed a third time and
began.  He spoke with a very slow, distinct voice, as if he was dictating
his memoirs, and always looked over the shoulder of the person to whom he
was talking.  In fact, he had a most distinguished manner.

“How fortunate it is for the King’s son,” he remarked, “that he is to be
married on the very day on which I am to be let off.  Really, if it had
been arranged beforehand, it could not have turned out better for him;
but, Princes are always lucky.”

“Dear me!” said the little Squib, “I thought it was quite the other way,
and that we were to be let off in the Prince’s honour.”

“It may be so with you,” he answered; “indeed, I have no doubt that it
is, but with me it is different.  I am a very remarkable Rocket, and come
of remarkable parents.  My mother was the most celebrated Catherine Wheel
of her day, and was renowned for her graceful dancing.  When she made her
great public appearance she spun round nineteen times before she went
out, and each time that she did so she threw into the air seven pink
stars.  She was three feet and a half in diameter, and made of the very
best gunpowder.  My father was a Rocket like myself, and of French
extraction.  He flew so high that the people were afraid that he would
never come down again.  He did, though, for he was of a kindly
disposition, and he made a most brilliant descent in a shower of golden
rain.  The newspapers wrote about his performance in very flattering
terms.  Indeed, the Court Gazette called him a triumph of Pylotechnic
art.”

“Pyrotechnic, Pyrotechnic, you mean,” said a Bengal Light; “I know it is
Pyrotechnic, for I saw it written on my own canister.”

“Well, I said Pylotechnic,” answered the Rocket, in a severe tone of
voice, and the Bengal Light felt so crushed that he began at once to
bully the little squibs, in order to show that he was still a person of
some importance.

“I was saying,” continued the Rocket, “I was saying—What was I saying?”

“You were talking about yourself,” replied the Roman Candle.

“Of course; I knew I was discussing some interesting subject when I was
so rudely interrupted.  I hate rudeness and bad manners of every kind,
for I am extremely sensitive.  No one in the whole world is so sensitive
as I am, I am quite sure of that.”

“What is a sensitive person?” said the Cracker to the Roman Candle.

“A person who, because he has corns himself, always treads on other
people’s toes,” answered the Roman Candle in a low whisper; and the
Cracker nearly exploded with laughter.

“Pray, what are you laughing at?” inquired the Rocket; “I am not
laughing.”

“I am laughing because I am happy,” replied the Cracker.

“That is a very selfish reason,” said the Rocket angrily.  “What right
have you to be happy?  You should be thinking about others.  In fact, you
should be thinking about me.  I am always thinking about myself, and I
expect everybody else to do the same.  That is what is called sympathy.
It is a beautiful virtue, and I possess it in a high degree.  Suppose,
for instance, anything happened to me to-night, what a misfortune that
would be for every one!  The Prince and Princess would never be happy
again, their whole married life would be spoiled; and as for the King, I
know he would not get over it.  Really, when I begin to reflect on the
importance of my position, I am almost moved to tears.”

“If you want to give pleasure to others,” cried the Roman Candle, “you
had better keep yourself dry.”

“Certainly,” exclaimed the Bengal Light, who was now in better spirits;
“that is only common sense.”

“Common sense, indeed!” said the Rocket indignantly; “you forget that I
am very uncommon, and very remarkable.  Why, anybody can have common
sense, provided that they have no imagination.  But I have imagination,
for I never think of things as they really are; I always think of them as
being quite different.  As for keeping myself dry, there is evidently no
one here who can at all appreciate an emotional nature.  Fortunately for
myself, I don’t care.  The only thing that sustains one through life is
the consciousness of the immense inferiority of everybody else, and this
is a feeling that I have always cultivated.  But none of you have any
hearts.  Here you are laughing and making merry just as if the Prince and
Princess had not just been married.”

“Well, really,” exclaimed a small Fire-balloon, “why not?  It is a most
joyful occasion, and when I soar up into the air I intend to tell the
stars all about it.  You will see them twinkle when I talk to them about
the pretty bride.”

“Ah! what a trivial view of life!” said the Rocket; “but it is only what
I expected.  There is nothing in you; you are hollow and empty.  Why,
perhaps the Prince and Princess may go to live in a country where there
is a deep river, and perhaps they may have one only son, a little
fair-haired boy with violet eyes like the Prince himself; and perhaps
some day he may go out to walk with his nurse; and perhaps the nurse may
go to sleep under a great elder-tree; and perhaps the little boy may fall
into the deep river and be drowned.  What a terrible misfortune!  Poor
people, to lose their only son!  It is really too dreadful!  I shall
never get over it.”

“But they have not lost their only son,” said the Roman Candle; “no
misfortune has happened to them at all.”

“I never said that they had,” replied the Rocket; “I said that they
might.  If they had lost their only son there would be no use in saying
anything more about the matter.  I hate people who cry over spilt milk.
But when I think that they might lose their only son, I certainly am very
much affected.”

“You certainly are!” cried the Bengal Light.  “In fact, you are the most
affected person I ever met.”

“You are the rudest person I ever met,” said the Rocket, “and you cannot
understand my friendship for the Prince.”

“Why, you don’t even know him,” growled the Roman Candle.

“I never said I knew him,” answered the Rocket.  “I dare say that if I
knew him I should not be his friend at all.  It is a very dangerous thing
to know one’s friends.”

“You had really better keep yourself dry,” said the Fire-balloon.  “That
is the important thing.”

“Very important for you, I have no doubt,” answered the Rocket, “but I
shall weep if I choose”; and he actually burst into real tears, which
flowed down his stick like rain-drops, and nearly drowned two little
beetles, who were just thinking of setting up house together, and were
looking for a nice dry spot to live in.

“He must have a truly romantic nature,” said the Catherine Wheel, “for he
weeps when there is nothing at all to weep about”; and she heaved a deep
sigh, and thought about the deal box.

But the Roman Candle and the Bengal Light were quite indignant, and kept
saying, “Humbug! humbug!” at the top of their voices.  They were
extremely practical, and whenever they objected to anything they called
it humbug.

Then the moon rose like a wonderful silver shield; and the stars began to
shine, and a sound of music came from the palace.

The Prince and Princess were leading the dance.  They danced so
beautifully that the tall white lilies peeped in at the window and
watched them, and the great red poppies nodded their heads and beat time.

Then ten o’clock struck, and then eleven, and then twelve, and at the
last stroke of midnight every one came out on the terrace, and the King
sent for the Royal Pyrotechnist.

“Let the fireworks begin,” said the King; and the Royal Pyrotechnist made
a low bow, and marched down to the end of the garden.  He had six
attendants with him, each of whom carried a lighted torch at the end of a
long pole.

It was certainly a magnificent display.

Whizz! Whizz! went the Catherine Wheel, as she spun round and round.
Boom!  Boom! went the Roman Candle.  Then the Squibs danced all over the
place, and the Bengal Lights made everything look scarlet.  “Good-bye,”
cried the Fire-balloon, as he soared away, dropping tiny blue sparks.
Bang! Bang! answered the Crackers, who were enjoying themselves
immensely.  Every one was a great success except the Remarkable Rocket.
He was so damp with crying that he could not go off at all.  The best
thing in him was the gunpowder, and that was so wet with tears that it
was of no use.  All his poor relations, to whom he would never speak,
except with a sneer, shot up into the sky like wonderful golden flowers
with blossoms of fire.  Huzza! Huzza! cried the Court; and the little
Princess laughed with pleasure.

“I suppose they are reserving me for some grand occasion,” said the
Rocket; “no doubt that is what it means,” and he looked more supercilious
than ever.

The next day the workmen came to put everything tidy.  “This is evidently
a deputation,” said the Rocket; “I will receive them with becoming
dignity” so he put his nose in the air, and began to frown severely as if
he were thinking about some very important subject.  But they took no
notice of him at all till they were just going away.  Then one of them
caught sight of him.  “Hallo!” he cried, “what a bad rocket!” and he
threw him over the wall into the ditch.

“BAD Rocket?  BAD Rocket?” he said, as he whirled through the air;
“impossible!  GRAND Rocket, that is what the man said.  BAD and GRAND
sound very much the same, indeed they often are the same”; and he fell
into the mud.

“It is not comfortable here,” he remarked, “but no doubt it is some
fashionable watering-place, and they have sent me away to recruit my
health.  My nerves are certainly very much shattered, and I require
rest.”

Then a little Frog, with bright jewelled eyes, and a green mottled coat,
swam up to him.

“A new arrival, I see!” said the Frog.  “Well, after all there is nothing
like mud.  Give me rainy weather and a ditch, and I am quite happy.  Do
you think it will be a wet afternoon?  I am sure I hope so, but the sky
is quite blue and cloudless.  What a pity!”

“Ahem! ahem!” said the Rocket, and he began to cough.

“What a delightful voice you have!” cried the Frog.  “Really it is quite
like a croak, and croaking is of course the most musical sound in the
world.  You will hear our glee-club this evening.  We sit in the old duck
pond close by the farmer’s house, and as soon as the moon rises we begin.
It is so entrancing that everybody lies awake to listen to us.  In fact,
it was only yesterday that I heard the farmer’s wife say to her mother
that she could not get a wink of sleep at night on account of us.  It is
most gratifying to find oneself so popular.”

“Ahem! ahem!” said the Rocket angrily.  He was very much annoyed that he
could not get a word in.

“A delightful voice, certainly,” continued the Frog; “I hope you will
come over to the duck-pond.  I am off to look for my daughters.  I have
six beautiful daughters, and I am so afraid the Pike may meet them.  He
is a perfect monster, and would have no hesitation in breakfasting off
them.  Well, good-bye: I have enjoyed our conversation very much, I
assure you.”

“Conversation, indeed!” said the Rocket.  “You have talked the whole time
yourself.  That is not conversation.”

“Somebody must listen,” answered the Frog, “and I like to do all the
talking myself.  It saves time, and prevents arguments.”

“But I like arguments,” said the Rocket.

“I hope not,” said the Frog complacently.  “Arguments are extremely
vulgar, for everybody in good society holds exactly the same opinions.
Good-bye a second time; I see my daughters in the distance and the little
Frog swam away.

“You are a very irritating person,” said the Rocket, “and very ill-bred.
I hate people who talk about themselves, as you do, when one wants to
talk about oneself, as I do.  It is what I call selfishness, and
selfishness is a most detestable thing, especially to any one of my
temperament, for I am well known for my sympathetic nature.  In fact, you
should take example by me; you could not possibly have a better model.
Now that you have the chance you had better avail yourself of it, for I
am going back to Court almost immediately.  I am a great favourite at
Court; in fact, the Prince and Princess were married yesterday in my
honour.  Of course you know nothing of these matters, for you are a
provincial.”

“There is no good talking to him,” said a Dragon-fly, who was sitting on
the top of a large brown bulrush; “no good at all, for he has gone away.”

“Well, that is his loss, not mine,” answered the Rocket.  “I am not going
to stop talking to him merely because he pays no attention.  I like
hearing myself talk.  It is one of my greatest pleasures.  I often have
long conversations all by myself, and I am so clever that sometimes I
don’t understand a single word of what I am saying.”

“Then you should certainly lecture on Philosophy,” said the Dragon-fly;
and he spread a pair of lovely gauze wings and soared away into the sky.

“How very silly of him not to stay here!” said the Rocket.  “I am sure
that he has not often got such a chance of improving his mind.  However,
I don’t care a bit.  Genius like mine is sure to be appreciated some
day”; and he sank down a little deeper into the mud.

After some time a large White Duck swam up to him.  She had yellow legs,
and webbed feet, and was considered a great beauty on account of her
waddle.

“Quack, quack, quack,” she said.  “What a curious shape you are!  May I
ask were you born like that, or is it the result of an accident?”

“It is quite evident that you have always lived in the country,” answered
the Rocket, “otherwise you would know who I am.  However, I excuse your
ignorance.  It would be unfair to expect other people to be as remarkable
as oneself.  You will no doubt be surprised to hear that I can fly up
into the sky, and come down in a shower of golden rain.”

“I don’t think much of that,” said the Duck, “as I cannot see what use it
is to any one.  Now, if you could plough the fields like the ox, or draw
a cart like the horse, or look after the sheep like the collie-dog, that
would be something.”

“My good creature,” cried the Rocket in a very haughty tone of voice, “I
see that you belong to the lower orders.  A person of my position is
never useful.  We have certain accomplishments, and that is more than
sufficient.  I have no sympathy myself with industry of any kind, least
of all with such industries as you seem to recommend.  Indeed, I have
always been of opinion that hard work is simply the refuge of people who
have nothing whatever to do.”

“Well, well,” said the Duck, who was of a very peaceable disposition, and
never quarrelled with any one, “everybody has different tastes.  I hope,
at any rate, that you are going to take up your residence here.”

“Oh! dear no,” cried the Rocket.  “I am merely a visitor, a distinguished
visitor.  The fact is that I find this place rather tedious.  There is
neither society here, nor solitude.  In fact, it is essentially suburban.
I shall probably go back to Court, for I know that I am destined to make
a sensation in the world.”

“I had thoughts of entering public life once myself,” remarked the Duck;
“there are so many things that need reforming.  Indeed, I took the chair
at a meeting some time ago, and we passed resolutions condemning
everything that we did not like.  However, they did not seem to have much
effect.  Now I go in for domesticity, and look after my family.”

“I am made for public life,” said the Rocket, “and so are all my
relations, even the humblest of them.  Whenever we appear we excite great
attention.  I have not actually appeared myself, but when I do so it will
be a magnificent sight.  As for domesticity, it ages one rapidly, and
distracts one’s mind from higher things.”

“Ah! the higher things of life, how fine they are!” said the Duck; “and
that reminds me how hungry I feel”: and she swam away down the stream,
saying, “Quack, quack, quack.”

“Come back! come back!” screamed the Rocket, “I have a great deal to say
to you”; but the Duck paid no attention to him.  “I am glad that she has
gone,” he said to himself, “she has a decidedly middle-class mind”; and
he sank a little deeper still into the mud, and began to think about the
loneliness of genius, when suddenly two little boys in white smocks came
running down the bank, with a kettle and some faggots.

“This must be the deputation,” said the Rocket, and he tried to look very
dignified.

“Hallo!” cried one of the boys, “look at this old stick!  I wonder how it
came here”; and he picked the rocket out of the ditch.

“OLD Stick!” said the Rocket, “impossible!  GOLD Stick, that is what he
said.  Gold Stick is very complimentary.  In fact, he mistakes me for one
of the Court dignitaries!”

“Let us put it into the fire!” said the other boy, “it will help to boil
the kettle.”

So they piled the faggots together, and put the Rocket on top, and lit
the fire.

“This is magnificent,” cried the Rocket, “they are going to let me off in
broad day-light, so that every one can see me.”

“We will go to sleep now,” they said, “and when we wake up the kettle
will be boiled”; and they lay down on the grass, and shut their eyes.

The Rocket was very damp, so he took a long time to burn.  At last,
however, the fire caught him.

“Now I am going off!” he cried, and he made himself very stiff and
straight.  “I know I shall go much higher than the stars, much higher
than the moon, much higher than the sun.  In fact, I shall go so high
that—”

Fizz! Fizz! Fizz! and he went straight up into the air.

“Delightful!” he cried, “I shall go on like this for ever.  What a
success I am!”

But nobody saw him.

Then he began to feel a curious tingling sensation all over him.

“Now I am going to explode,” he cried.  “I shall set the whole world on
fire, and make such a noise that nobody will talk about anything else for
a whole year.”  And he certainly did explode.  Bang! Bang! Bang! went the
gunpowder.  There was no doubt about it.

But nobody heard him, not even the two little boys, for they were sound
asleep.

Then all that was left of him was the stick, and this fell down on the
back of a Goose who was taking a walk by the side of the ditch.

“Good heavens!” cried the Goose.  “It is going to rain sticks”; and she
rushed into the water.

“I knew I should create a great sensation,” gasped the Rocket, and he
went out.


THE WONDERFUL WIZARD OF OZ




1.  The Cyclone


Dorothy lived in the midst of the great Kansas prairies, with Uncle
Henry, who was a farmer, and Aunt Em, who was the farmer's wife.  Their
house was small, for the lumber to build it had to be carried by wagon
many miles.  There were four walls, a floor and a roof, which made one
room; and this room contained a rusty looking cookstove, a cupboard for
the dishes, a table, three or four chairs, and the beds.  Uncle Henry
and Aunt Em had a big bed in one corner, and Dorothy a little bed in
another corner.  There was no garret at all, and no cellar--except a
small hole dug in the ground, called a cyclone cellar, where the family
could go in case one of those great whirlwinds arose, mighty enough to
crush any building in its path.  It was reached by a trap door in the
middle of the floor, from which a ladder led down into the small, dark
hole.

When Dorothy stood in the doorway and looked around, she could see
nothing but the great gray prairie on every side.  Not a tree nor a
house broke the broad sweep of flat country that reached to the edge of
the sky in all directions.  The sun had baked the plowed land into a
gray mass, with little cracks running through it.  Even the grass was
not green, for the sun had burned the tops of the long blades until
they were the same gray color to be seen everywhere.  Once the house
had been painted, but the sun blistered the paint and the rains washed
it away, and now the house was as dull and gray as everything else.

When Aunt Em came there to live she was a young, pretty wife.  The sun
and wind had changed her, too.  They had taken the sparkle from her
eyes and left them a sober gray; they had taken the red from her cheeks
and lips, and they were gray also.  She was thin and gaunt, and never
smiled now.  When Dorothy, who was an orphan, first came to her, Aunt
Em had been so startled by the child's laughter that she would scream
and press her hand upon her heart whenever Dorothy's merry voice
reached her ears; and she still looked at the little girl with wonder
that she could find anything to laugh at.

Uncle Henry never laughed.  He worked hard from morning till night and
did not know what joy was.  He was gray also, from his long beard to
his rough boots, and he looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke.

It was Toto that made Dorothy laugh, and saved her from growing as gray
as her other surroundings.  Toto was not gray; he was a little black
dog, with long silky hair and small black eyes that twinkled merrily on
either side of his funny, wee nose.  Toto played all day long, and
Dorothy played with him, and loved him dearly.

Today, however, they were not playing.  Uncle Henry sat upon the
doorstep and looked anxiously at the sky, which was even grayer than
usual.  Dorothy stood in the door with Toto in her arms, and looked at
the sky too.  Aunt Em was washing the dishes.

From the far north they heard a low wail of the wind, and Uncle Henry
and Dorothy could see where the long grass bowed in waves before the
coming storm.  There now came a sharp whistling in the air from the
south, and as they turned their eyes that way they saw ripples in the
grass coming from that direction also.

Suddenly Uncle Henry stood up.

"There's a cyclone coming, Em," he called to his wife.  "I'll go look
after the stock."  Then he ran toward the sheds where the cows and
horses were kept.

Aunt Em dropped her work and came to the door.  One glance told her of
the danger close at hand.

"Quick, Dorothy!" she screamed.  "Run for the cellar!"

Toto jumped out of Dorothy's arms and hid under the bed, and the girl
started to get him.  Aunt Em, badly frightened, threw open the trap
door in the floor and climbed down the ladder into the small, dark
hole.  Dorothy caught Toto at last and started to follow her aunt.
When she was halfway across the room there came a great shriek from the
wind, and the house shook so hard that she lost her footing and sat
down suddenly upon the floor.

Then a strange thing happened.

The house whirled around two or three times and rose slowly through the
air.  Dorothy felt as if she were going up in a balloon.

The north and south winds met where the house stood, and made it the
exact center of the cyclone.  In the middle of a cyclone the air is
generally still, but the great pressure of the wind on every side of
the house raised it up higher and higher, until it was at the very top
of the cyclone; and there it remained and was carried miles and miles
away as easily as you could carry a feather.

It was very dark, and the wind howled horribly around her, but Dorothy
found she was riding quite easily.  After the first few whirls around,
and one other time when the house tipped badly, she felt as if she were
being rocked gently, like a baby in a cradle.

Toto did not like it.  He ran about the room, now here, now there,
barking loudly; but Dorothy sat quite still on the floor and waited to
see what would happen.

Once Toto got too near the open trap door, and fell in; and at first
the little girl thought she had lost him.  But soon she saw one of his
ears sticking up through the hole, for the strong pressure of the air
was keeping him up so that he could not fall.  She crept to the hole,
caught Toto by the ear, and dragged him into the room again, afterward
closing the trap door so that no more accidents could happen.

Hour after hour passed away, and slowly Dorothy got over her fright;
but she felt quite lonely, and the wind shrieked so loudly all about
her that she nearly became deaf.  At first she had wondered if she
would be dashed to pieces when the house fell again; but as the hours
passed and nothing terrible happened, she stopped worrying and resolved
to wait calmly and see what the future would bring.  At last she
crawled over the swaying floor to her bed, and lay down upon it; and
Toto followed and lay down beside her.

In spite of the swaying of the house and the wailing of the wind,
Dorothy soon closed her eyes and fell fast asleep.




2.  The Council with the Munchkins


She was awakened by a shock, so sudden and severe that if Dorothy had
not been lying on the soft bed she might have been hurt.  As it was,
the jar made her catch her breath and wonder what had happened; and
Toto put his cold little nose into her face and whined dismally.
Dorothy sat up and noticed that the house was not moving; nor was it
dark, for the bright sunshine came in at the window, flooding the
little room.  She sprang from her bed and with Toto at her heels ran
and opened the door.

The little girl gave a cry of amazement and looked about her, her eyes
growing bigger and bigger at the wonderful sights she saw.

The cyclone had set the house down very gently--for a cyclone--in the
midst of a country of marvelous beauty.  There were lovely patches of
greensward all about, with stately trees bearing rich and luscious
fruits.  Banks of gorgeous flowers were on every hand, and birds with
rare and brilliant plumage sang and fluttered in the trees and bushes.
A little way off was a small brook, rushing and sparkling along between
green banks, and murmuring in a voice very grateful to a little girl
who had lived so long on the dry, gray prairies.

While she stood looking eagerly at the strange and beautiful sights,
she noticed coming toward her a group of the queerest people she had
ever seen.  They were not as big as the grown folk she had always been
used to; but neither were they very small.  In fact, they seemed about
as tall as Dorothy, who was a well-grown child for her age, although
they were, so far as looks go, many years older.

Three were men and one a woman, and all were oddly dressed.  They wore
round hats that rose to a small point a foot above their heads, with
little bells around the brims that tinkled sweetly as they moved.  The
hats of the men were blue; the little woman's hat was white, and she
wore a white gown that hung in pleats from her shoulders.  Over it were
sprinkled little stars that glistened in the sun like diamonds.  The
men were dressed in blue, of the same shade as their hats, and wore
well-polished boots with a deep roll of blue at the tops.  The men,
Dorothy thought, were about as old as Uncle Henry, for two of them had
beards.  But the little woman was doubtless much older.  Her face was
covered with wrinkles, her hair was nearly white, and she walked rather
stiffly.

When these people drew near the house where Dorothy was standing in the
doorway, they paused and whispered among themselves, as if afraid to
come farther.  But the little old woman walked up to Dorothy, made a
low bow and said, in a sweet voice:

"You are welcome, most noble Sorceress, to the land of the Munchkins.
We are so grateful to you for having killed the Wicked Witch of the
East, and for setting our people free from bondage."

Dorothy listened to this speech with wonder.  What could the little
woman possibly mean by calling her a sorceress, and saying she had
killed the Wicked Witch of the East?  Dorothy was an innocent, harmless
little girl, who had been carried by a cyclone many miles from home;
and she had never killed anything in all her life.

But the little woman evidently expected her to answer; so Dorothy said,
with hesitation, "You are very kind, but there must be some mistake.  I
have not killed anything."

"Your house did, anyway," replied the little old woman, with a laugh,
"and that is the same thing.  See!" she continued, pointing to the
corner of the house.  "There are her two feet, still sticking out from
under a block of wood."

Dorothy looked, and gave a little cry of fright.  There, indeed, just
under the corner of the great beam the house rested on, two feet were
sticking out, shod in silver shoes with pointed toes.

"Oh, dear!  Oh, dear!" cried Dorothy, clasping her hands together in
dismay.  "The house must have fallen on her.  Whatever shall we do?"

"There is nothing to be done," said the little woman calmly.

"But who was she?" asked Dorothy.

"She was the Wicked Witch of the East, as I said," answered the little
woman.  "She has held all the Munchkins in bondage for many years,
making them slave for her night and day.  Now they are all set free,
and are grateful to you for the favor."

"Who are the Munchkins?" inquired Dorothy.

"They are the people who live in this land of the East
 where the Wicked Witch ruled."

"Are you a Munchkin?" asked Dorothy.

"No, but I am their friend, although I live in the land of the North.
When they saw the Witch of the East was dead the Munchkins sent a swift
messenger to me, and I came at once.  I am the Witch of the North."

"Oh, gracious!" cried Dorothy.  "Are you a real witch?"

"Yes, indeed," answered the little woman.  "But I am a good witch, and
the people love me.  I am not as powerful as the Wicked Witch was who
ruled here, or I should have set the people free myself."

"But I thought all witches were wicked," said the girl, who was half
frightened at facing a real witch.  "Oh, no, that is a great mistake.
There were only four witches in all the Land of Oz, and two of them,
those who live in the North and the South, are good witches.  I know
this is true, for I am one of them myself, and cannot be mistaken.
Those who dwelt in the East and the West were, indeed, wicked witches;
but now that you have killed one of them, there is but one Wicked Witch
in all the Land of Oz--the one who lives in the West."

"But," said Dorothy, after a moment's thought, "Aunt Em has told me
that the witches were all dead--years and years ago."

"Who is Aunt Em?" inquired the little old woman.

"She is my aunt who lives in Kansas, where I came from."

The Witch of the North seemed to think for a time, with her head bowed
and her eyes upon the ground.  Then she looked up and said, "I do not
know where Kansas is, for I have never heard that country mentioned
before.  But tell me, is it a civilized country?"

"Oh, yes," replied Dorothy.

"Then that accounts for it.  In the civilized countries I believe there
are no witches left, nor wizards, nor sorceresses, nor magicians.  But,
you see, the Land of Oz has never been civilized, for we are cut off
from all the rest of the world.  Therefore we still have witches and
wizards amongst us."

"Who are the wizards?" asked Dorothy.

"Oz himself is the Great Wizard," answered the Witch, sinking her voice
to a whisper.  "He is more powerful than all the rest of us together.
He lives in the City of Emeralds."

Dorothy was going to ask another question, but just then the Munchkins,
who had been standing silently by, gave a loud shout and pointed to the
corner of the house where the Wicked Witch had been lying.

"What is it?" asked the little old woman, and looked, and began to
laugh.  The feet of the dead Witch had disappeared entirely, and
nothing was left but the silver shoes.

"She was so old," explained the Witch of the North, "that she dried up
quickly in the sun.  That is the end of her.  But the silver shoes are
yours, and you shall have them to wear." She reached down and picked up
the shoes, and after shaking the dust out of them handed them to
Dorothy.

"The Witch of the East was proud of those silver shoes," said one of
the Munchkins, "and there is some charm connected with them; but what
it is we never knew."

Dorothy carried the shoes into the house and placed them on the table.
Then she came out again to the Munchkins and said:

"I am anxious to get back to my aunt and uncle, for I am sure they will
worry about me.  Can you help me find my way?"

The Munchkins and the Witch first looked at one another, and then at
Dorothy, and then shook their heads.

"At the East, not far from here," said one, "there is a great desert,
and none could live to cross it."

"It is the same at the South," said another, "for I have been there and
seen it.  The South is the country of the Quadlings."

"I am told," said the third man, "that it is the same at the West.  And
that country, where the Winkies live, is ruled by the Wicked Witch of
the West, who would make you her slave if you passed her way."

"The North is my home," said the old lady, "and at its edge is the same
great desert that surrounds this Land of Oz.  I'm afraid, my dear, you
will have to live with us."

Dorothy began to sob at this, for she felt lonely among all these
strange people.  Her tears seemed to grieve the kind-hearted Munchkins,
for they immediately took out their handkerchiefs and began to weep
also.  As for the little old woman, she took off her cap and balanced
the point on the end of her nose, while she counted "One, two, three"
in a solemn voice.  At once the cap changed to a slate, on which was
written in big, white chalk marks:


 "LET DOROTHY GO TO THE CITY OF EMERALDS"


The little old woman took the slate from her nose, and having read the
words on it, asked, "Is your name Dorothy, my dear?"

"Yes," answered the child, looking up and drying her tears.

"Then you must go to the City of Emeralds.  Perhaps Oz will help you."

"Where is this city?" asked Dorothy.

"It is exactly in the center of the country, and is ruled by Oz, the
Great Wizard I told you of."

"Is he a good man?" inquired the girl anxiously.

"He is a good Wizard.  Whether he is a man or not I cannot tell, for I
have never seen him."

"How can I get there?" asked Dorothy.

"You must walk.  It is a long journey, through a country that is
sometimes pleasant and sometimes dark and terrible.  However, I will
use all the magic arts I know of to keep you from harm."

"Won't you go with me?" pleaded the girl, who had begun to look upon
the little old woman as her only friend.

"No, I cannot do that," she replied, "but I will give you my kiss, and
no one will dare injure a person who has been kissed by the Witch of
the North."

She came close to Dorothy and kissed her gently on the forehead.  Where
her lips touched the girl they left a round, shining mark, as Dorothy
found out soon after.

"The road to the City of Emeralds is paved with yellow brick," said the
Witch, "so you cannot miss it.  When you get to Oz do not be afraid of
him, but tell your story and ask him to help you.  Good-bye, my dear."

The three Munchkins bowed low to her and wished her a pleasant journey,
after which they walked away through the trees.  The Witch gave Dorothy
a friendly little nod, whirled around on her left heel three times, and
straightway disappeared, much to the surprise of little Toto, who
barked after her loudly enough when she had gone, because he had been
afraid even to growl while she stood by.

But Dorothy, knowing her to be a witch, had expected her to disappear
in just that way, and was not surprised in the least.




3.  How Dorothy Saved the Scarecrow


When Dorothy was left alone she began to feel hungry.  So she went to
the cupboard and cut herself some bread, which she spread with butter.
She gave some to Toto, and taking a pail from the shelf she carried it
down to the little brook and filled it with clear, sparkling water.
Toto ran over to the trees and began to bark at the birds sitting
there.  Dorothy went to get him, and saw such delicious fruit hanging
from the branches that she gathered some of it, finding it just what
she wanted to help out her breakfast.

Then she went back to the house, and having helped herself and Toto to
a good drink of the cool, clear water, she set about making ready for
the journey to the City of Emeralds.

Dorothy had only one other dress, but that happened to be clean and was
hanging on a peg beside her bed.  It was gingham, with checks of white
and blue; and although the blue was somewhat faded with many washings,
it was still a pretty frock.  The girl washed herself carefully,
dressed herself in the clean gingham, and tied her pink sunbonnet on
her head.  She took a little basket and filled it with bread from the
cupboard, laying a white cloth over the top.  Then she looked down at
her feet and noticed how old and worn her shoes were.

"They surely will never do for a long journey, Toto," she said.  And
Toto looked up into her face with his little black eyes and wagged his
tail to show he knew what she meant.

At that moment Dorothy saw lying on the table the silver shoes that had
belonged to the Witch of the East.

"I wonder if they will fit me," she said to Toto.  "They would be just
the thing to take a long walk in, for they could not wear out."

She took off her old leather shoes and tried on the silver ones, which
fitted her as well as if they had been made for her.

Finally she picked up her basket.

"Come along, Toto," she said.  "We will go to the Emerald City and ask
the Great Oz how to get back to Kansas again."

She closed the door, locked it, and put the key carefully in the pocket
of her dress.  And so, with Toto trotting along soberly behind her, she
started on her journey.

There were several roads nearby, but it did not take her long to find
the one paved with yellow bricks.  Within a short time she was walking
briskly toward the Emerald City, her silver shoes tinkling merrily on
the hard, yellow road-bed.  The sun shone bright and the birds sang
sweetly, and Dorothy did not feel nearly so bad as you might think a
little girl would who had been suddenly whisked away from her own
country and set down in the midst of a strange land.

She was surprised, as she walked along, to see how pretty the country
was about her.  There were neat fences at the sides of the road,
painted a dainty blue color, and beyond them were fields of grain and
vegetables in abundance.  Evidently the Munchkins were good farmers and
able to raise large crops.  Once in a while she would pass a house, and
the people came out to look at her and bow low as she went by; for
everyone knew she had been the means of destroying the Wicked Witch and
setting them free from bondage.  The houses of the Munchkins were
odd-looking dwellings, for each was round, with a big dome for a roof.
All were painted blue, for in this country of the East blue was the
favorite color.

Toward evening, when Dorothy was tired with her long walk and began to
wonder where she should pass the night, she came to a house rather
larger than the rest.  On the green lawn before it many men and women
were dancing.  Five little fiddlers played as loudly as possible, and
the people were laughing and singing, while a big table near by was
loaded with delicious fruits and nuts, pies and cakes, and many other
good things to eat.

The people greeted Dorothy kindly, and invited her to supper and to
pass the night with them; for this was the home of one of the richest
Munchkins in the land, and his friends were gathered with him to
celebrate their freedom from the bondage of the Wicked Witch.

Dorothy ate a hearty supper and was waited upon by the rich Munchkin
himself, whose name was Boq.  Then she sat upon a settee and watched
the people dance.

When Boq saw her silver shoes he said, "You must be a great sorceress."

"Why?" asked the girl.

"Because you wear silver shoes and have killed the Wicked Witch.
Besides, you have white in your frock, and only witches and sorceresses
wear white."

"My dress is blue and white checked," said Dorothy, smoothing out the
wrinkles in it.

"It is kind of you to wear that," said Boq.  "Blue is the color of the
Munchkins, and white is the witch color.  So we know you are a friendly
witch."

Dorothy did not know what to say to this, for all the people seemed to
think her a witch, and she knew very well she was only an ordinary
little girl who had come by the chance of a cyclone into a strange land.

When she had tired watching the dancing, Boq led her into the house,
where he gave her a room with a pretty bed in it.  The sheets were made
of blue cloth, and Dorothy slept soundly in them till morning, with
Toto curled up on the blue rug beside her.

She ate a hearty breakfast, and watched a wee Munchkin baby, who played
with Toto and pulled his tail and crowed and laughed in a way that
greatly amused Dorothy.  Toto was a fine curiosity to all the people,
for they had never seen a dog before.

"How far is it to the Emerald City?" the girl asked.

"I do not know," answered Boq gravely, "for I have never been there.
It is better for people to keep away from Oz, unless they have business
with him.  But it is a long way to the Emerald City, and it will take
you many days.  The country here is rich and pleasant, but you must
pass through rough and dangerous places before you reach the end of
your journey."

This worried Dorothy a little, but she knew that only the Great Oz
could help her get to Kansas again, so she bravely resolved not to turn
back.

She bade her friends good-bye, and again started along the road of
yellow brick.  When she had gone several miles she thought she would
stop to rest, and so climbed to the top of the fence beside the road
and sat down.  There was a great cornfield beyond the fence, and not
far away she saw a Scarecrow, placed high on a pole to keep the birds
from the ripe corn.

Dorothy leaned her chin upon her hand and gazed thoughtfully at the
Scarecrow.  Its head was a small sack stuffed with straw, with eyes,
nose, and mouth painted on it to represent a face.  An old, pointed
blue hat, that had belonged to some Munchkin, was perched on his head,
and the rest of the figure was a blue suit of clothes, worn and faded,
which had also been stuffed with straw.  On the feet were some old
boots with blue tops, such as every man wore in this country, and the
figure was raised above the stalks of corn by means of the pole stuck
up its back.

While Dorothy was looking earnestly into the queer, painted face of the
Scarecrow, she was surprised to see one of the eyes slowly wink at her.
She thought she must have been mistaken at first, for none of the
scarecrows in Kansas ever wink; but presently the figure nodded its
head to her in a friendly way.  Then she climbed down from the fence
and walked up to it, while Toto ran around the pole and barked.

"Good day," said the Scarecrow, in a rather husky voice.

"Did you speak?" asked the girl, in wonder.

"Certainly," answered the Scarecrow.  "How do you do?"

"I'm pretty well, thank you," replied Dorothy politely.  "How do you
do?"

"I'm not feeling well," said the Scarecrow, with a smile, "for it is
very tedious being perched up here night and day to scare away crows."

"Can't you get down?" asked Dorothy.

"No, for this pole is stuck up my back.  If you will please take away
the pole I shall be greatly obliged to you."

Dorothy reached up both arms and lifted the figure off the pole, for,
being stuffed with straw, it was quite light.

"Thank you very much," said the Scarecrow, when he had been set down on
the ground.  "I feel like a new man."

Dorothy was puzzled at this, for it sounded queer to hear a stuffed man
speak, and to see him bow and walk along beside her.

"Who are you?" asked the Scarecrow when he had stretched himself and
yawned.  "And where are you going?"

"My name is Dorothy," said the girl, "and I am going to the Emerald
City, to ask the Great Oz to send me back to Kansas."

"Where is the Emerald City?" he inquired.  "And who is Oz?"

"Why, don't you know?" she returned, in surprise.

"No, indeed.  I don't know anything.  You see, I am stuffed, so I have
no brains at all," he answered sadly.

"Oh," said Dorothy, "I'm awfully sorry for you."

"Do you think," he asked, "if I go to the Emerald City with you, that
Oz would give me some brains?"

"I cannot tell," she returned, "but you may come with me, if you like.
If Oz will not give you any brains you will be no worse off than you
are now."

"That is true," said the Scarecrow.  "You see," he continued
confidentially, "I don't mind my legs and arms and body being stuffed,
because I cannot get hurt.  If anyone treads on my toes or sticks a pin
into me, it doesn't matter, for I can't feel it.  But I do not want
people to call me a fool, and if my head stays stuffed with straw
instead of with brains, as yours is, how am I ever to know anything?"

"I understand how you feel," said the little girl, who was truly sorry
for him.  "If you will come with me I'll ask Oz to do all he can for
you."

"Thank you," he answered gratefully.

They walked back to the road.  Dorothy helped him over the fence, and
they started along the path of yellow brick for the Emerald City.

Toto did not like this addition to the party at first.  He smelled
around the stuffed man as if he suspected there might be a nest of rats
in the straw, and he often growled in an unfriendly way at the
Scarecrow.

"Don't mind Toto," said Dorothy to her new friend.  "He never bites."

"Oh, I'm not afraid," replied the Scarecrow.  "He can't hurt the straw.
Do let me carry that basket for you.  I shall not mind it, for I can't
get tired.  I'll tell you a secret," he continued, as he walked along.
"There is only one thing in the world I am afraid of."

"What is that?" asked Dorothy; "the Munchkin farmer who made you?"

"No," answered the Scarecrow; "it's a lighted match."




4.  The Road Through the Forest


After a few hours the road began to be rough, and the walking grew so
difficult that the Scarecrow often stumbled over the yellow bricks,
which were here very uneven.  Sometimes, indeed, they were broken or
missing altogether, leaving holes that Toto jumped across and Dorothy
walked around.  As for the Scarecrow, having no brains, he walked
straight ahead, and so stepped into the holes and fell at full length
on the hard bricks.  It never hurt him, however, and Dorothy would pick
him up and set him upon his feet again, while he joined her in laughing
merrily at his own mishap.

The farms were not nearly so well cared for here as they were farther
back.  There were fewer houses and fewer fruit trees, and the farther
they went the more dismal and lonesome the country became.

At noon they sat down by the roadside, near a little brook, and Dorothy
opened her basket and got out some bread.  She offered a piece to the
Scarecrow, but he refused.

"I am never hungry," he said, "and it is a lucky thing I am not, for my
mouth is only painted, and if I should cut a hole in it so I could eat,
the straw I am stuffed with would come out, and that would spoil the
shape of my head."

Dorothy saw at once that this was true, so she only nodded and went on
eating her bread.

"Tell me something about yourself and the country you came from," said
the Scarecrow, when she had finished her dinner.  So she told him all
about Kansas, and how gray everything was there, and how the cyclone
had carried her to this queer Land of Oz.

The Scarecrow listened carefully, and said, "I cannot understand why
you should wish to leave this beautiful country and go back to the dry,
gray place you call Kansas."

"That is because you have no brains" answered the girl.  "No matter how
dreary and gray our homes are, we people of flesh and blood would
rather live there than in any other country, be it ever so beautiful.
There is no place like home."

The Scarecrow sighed.

"Of course I cannot understand it," he said.  "If your heads were
stuffed with straw, like mine, you would probably all live in the
beautiful places, and then Kansas would have no people at all.  It is
fortunate for Kansas that you have brains."

"Won't you tell me a story, while we are resting?" asked the child.

The Scarecrow looked at her reproachfully, and answered:

"My life has been so short that I really know nothing whatever.  I was
only made day before yesterday.  What happened in the world before that
time is all unknown to me.  Luckily, when the farmer made my head, one
of the first things he did was to paint my ears, so that I heard what
was going on.  There was another Munchkin with him, and the first thing
I heard was the farmer saying, 'How do you like those ears?'

"'They aren't straight,'" answered the other.

"'Never mind,'" said the farmer.  "'They are ears just the same,'"
which was true enough.

"'Now I'll make the eyes,'" said the farmer.  So he painted my right
eye, and as soon as it was finished I found myself looking at him and
at everything around me with a great deal of curiosity, for this was my
first glimpse of the world.

"'That's a rather pretty eye,'" remarked the Munchkin who was watching
the farmer.  "'Blue paint is just the color for eyes.'

"'I think I'll make the other a little bigger,'" said the farmer.  And
when the second eye was done I could see much better than before.  Then
he made my nose and my mouth.  But I did not speak, because at that
time I didn't know what a mouth was for.  I had the fun of watching
them make my body and my arms and legs; and when they fastened on my
head, at last, I felt very proud, for I thought I was just as good a
man as anyone.

"'This fellow will scare the crows fast enough,' said the farmer.  'He
looks just like a man.'

"'Why, he is a man,' said the other, and I quite agreed with him.  The
farmer carried me under his arm to the cornfield, and set me up on a
tall stick, where you found me.  He and his friend soon after walked
away and left me alone.

"I did not like to be deserted this way.  So I tried to walk after
them.  But my feet would not touch the ground, and I was forced to stay
on that pole.  It was a lonely life to lead, for I had nothing to think
of, having been made such a little while before.  Many crows and other
birds flew into the cornfield, but as soon as they saw me they flew
away again, thinking I was a Munchkin; and this pleased me and made me
feel that I was quite an important person.  By and by an old crow flew
near me, and after looking at me carefully he perched upon my shoulder
and said:

"'I wonder if that farmer thought to fool me in this clumsy manner.
Any crow of sense could see that you are only stuffed with straw.'
Then he hopped down at my feet and ate all the corn he wanted.  The
other birds, seeing he was not harmed by me, came to eat the corn too,
so in a short time there was a great flock of them about me.

"I felt sad at this, for it showed I was not such a good Scarecrow
after all; but the old crow comforted me, saying, 'If you only had
brains in your head you would be as good a man as any of them, and a
better man than some of them.  Brains are the only things worth having
in this world, no matter whether one is a crow or a man.'

"After the crows had gone I thought this over, and decided I would try
hard to get some brains.  By good luck you came along and pulled me off
the stake, and from what you say I am sure the Great Oz will give me
brains as soon as we get to the Emerald City."

"I hope so," said Dorothy earnestly, "since you seem anxious to have
them."

"Oh, yes; I am anxious," returned the Scarecrow.  "It is such an
uncomfortable feeling to know one is a fool."

"Well," said the girl, "let us go."  And she handed the basket to the
Scarecrow.

There were no fences at all by the roadside now, and the land was rough
and untilled.  Toward evening they came to a great forest, where the
trees grew so big and close together that their branches met over the
road of yellow brick.  It was almost dark under the trees, for the
branches shut out the daylight; but the travelers did not stop, and
went on into the forest.

"If this road goes in, it must come out," said the Scarecrow, "and as
the Emerald City is at the other end of the road, we must go wherever
it leads us."

"Anyone would know that," said Dorothy.

"Certainly; that is why I know it," returned the Scarecrow.  "If it
required brains to figure it out, I never should have said it."

After an hour or so the light faded away, and they found themselves
stumbling along in the darkness.  Dorothy could not see at all, but
Toto could, for some dogs see very well in the dark; and the Scarecrow
declared he could see as well as by day.  So she took hold of his arm
and managed to get along fairly well.

"If you see any house, or any place where we can pass the night," she
said, "you must tell me; for it is very uncomfortable walking in the
dark."

Soon after the Scarecrow stopped.

"I see a little cottage at the right of us," he said, "built of logs
and branches.  Shall we go there?"

"Yes, indeed," answered the child.  "I am all tired out."

So the Scarecrow led her through the trees until they reached the
cottage, and Dorothy entered and found a bed of dried leaves in one
corner.  She lay down at once, and with Toto beside her soon fell into
a sound sleep.  The Scarecrow, who was never tired, stood up in another
corner and waited patiently until morning came.




5.  The Rescue of the Tin Woodman


When Dorothy awoke the sun was shining through the trees and Toto had
long been out chasing birds around him and squirrels.  She sat up and
looked around her. There was the Scarecrow, still standing patiently in his corner,
waiting for her.

"We must go and search for water," she said to him.

"Why do you want water?" he asked.

"To wash my face clean after the dust of the road, and to drink, so the
dry bread will not stick in my throat."

"It must be inconvenient to be made of flesh," said the Scarecrow
thoughtfully, "for you must sleep, and eat and drink.  However, you
have brains, and it is worth a lot of bother to be able to think
properly."

They left the cottage and walked through the trees until they found a
little spring of clear water, where Dorothy drank and bathed and ate
her breakfast.  She saw there was not much bread left in the basket,
and the girl was thankful the Scarecrow did not have to eat anything,
for there was scarcely enough for herself and Toto for the day.

When she had finished her meal, and was about to go back to the road of
yellow brick, she was startled to hear a deep groan near by.

"What was that?" she asked timidly.

"I cannot imagine," replied the Scarecrow; "but we can go and see."

Just then another groan reached their ears, and the sound seemed to
come from behind them.  They turned and walked through the forest a few
steps, when Dorothy discovered something shining in a ray of sunshine
that fell between the trees.  She ran to the place and then stopped
short, with a little cry of surprise.

One of the big trees had been partly chopped through, and standing
beside it, with an uplifted axe in his hands, was a man made entirely
of tin.  His head and arms and legs were jointed upon his body, but he
stood perfectly motionless, as if he could not stir at all.

Dorothy looked at him in amazement, and so did the Scarecrow, while
Toto barked sharply and made a snap at the tin legs, which hurt his
teeth.

"Did you groan?" asked Dorothy.

"Yes," answered the tin man, "I did.  I've been groaning for more than
a year, and no one has ever heard me before or come to help me."

"What can I do for you?" she inquired softly, for she was moved by the
sad voice in which the man spoke.

"Get an oil-can and oil my joints," he answered.  "They are rusted so
badly that I cannot move them at all; if I am well oiled I shall soon
be all right again.  You will find an oil-can on a shelf in my cottage."

Dorothy at once ran back to the cottage and found the oil-can, and then
she returned and asked anxiously, "Where are your joints?"

"Oil my neck, first," replied the Tin Woodman.  So she oiled it, and as
it was quite badly rusted the Scarecrow took hold of the tin head and
moved it gently from side to side until it worked freely, and then the
man could turn it himself.

"Now oil the joints in my arms," he said.  And Dorothy oiled them and
the Scarecrow bent them carefully until they were quite free from rust
and as good as new.

The Tin Woodman gave a sigh of satisfaction and lowered his axe, which
he leaned against the tree.

"This is a great comfort," he said.  "I have been holding that axe in
the air ever since I rusted, and I'm glad to be able to put it down at
last.  Now, if you will oil the joints of my legs, I shall be all right
once more."

So they oiled his legs until he could move them freely; and he thanked
them again and again for his release, for he seemed a very polite
creature, and very grateful.

"I might have stood there always if you had not come along," he said;
"so you have certainly saved my life.  How did you happen to be here?"

"We are on our way to the Emerald City to see the Great Oz," she
answered, "and we stopped at your cottage to pass the night."

"Why do you wish to see Oz?" he asked.

"I want him to send me back to Kansas, and the Scarecrow wants him to
put a few brains into his head," she replied.

The Tin Woodman appeared to think deeply for a moment.  Then he said:

"Do you suppose Oz could give me a heart?"

"Why, I guess so," Dorothy answered.  "It would be as easy as to give
the Scarecrow brains."

"True," the Tin Woodman returned.  "So, if you will allow me to join
your party, I will also go to the Emerald City and ask Oz to help me."

"Come along," said the Scarecrow heartily, and Dorothy added that she
would be pleased to have his company.  So the Tin Woodman shouldered
his axe and they all passed through the forest until they came to the
road that was paved with yellow brick.

The Tin Woodman had asked Dorothy to put the oil-can in her basket.
"For," he said, "if I should get caught in the rain, and rust again, I
would need the oil-can badly."

It was a bit of good luck to have their new comrade join the party, for
soon after they had begun their journey again they came to a place
where the trees and branches grew so thick over the road that the
travelers could not pass.  But the Tin Woodman set to work with his axe
and chopped so well that soon he cleared a passage for the entire party.

Dorothy was thinking so earnestly as they walked along that she did not
notice when the Scarecrow stumbled into a hole and rolled over to the
side of the road.  Indeed he was obliged to call to her to help him up
again.

"Why didn't you walk around the hole?" asked the Tin Woodman.

"I don't know enough," replied the Scarecrow cheerfully.  "My head is
stuffed with straw, you know, and that is why I am going to Oz to ask
him for some brains."

"Oh, I see," said the Tin Woodman.  "But, after all, brains are not the
best things in the world."

"Have you any?" inquired the Scarecrow.

"No, my head is quite empty," answered the Woodman.  "But once I had
brains, and a heart also; so, having tried them both, I should much
rather have a heart."

"And why is that?" asked the Scarecrow.

"I will tell you my story, and then you will know."

So, while they were walking through the forest, the Tin Woodman told
the following story:

"I was born the son of a woodman who chopped down trees in the forest
and sold the wood for a living.  When I grew up, I too became a
woodchopper, and after my father died I took care of my old mother as
long as she lived.  Then I made up my mind that instead of living alone
I would marry, so that I might not become lonely.

"There was one of the Munchkin girls who was so beautiful that I soon
grew to love her with all my heart.  She, on her part, promised to
marry me as soon as I could earn enough money to build a better house
for her; so I set to work harder than ever.  But the girl lived with an
old woman who did not want her to marry anyone, for she was so lazy she
wished the girl to remain with her and do the cooking and the
housework.  So the old woman went to the Wicked Witch of the East, and
promised her two sheep and a cow if she would prevent the marriage.
Thereupon the Wicked Witch enchanted my axe, and when I was chopping
away at my best one day, for I was anxious to get the new house and my
wife as soon as possible, the axe slipped all at once and cut off my
left leg.

"This at first seemed a great misfortune, for I knew a one-legged man
could not do very well as a wood-chopper.  So I went to a tinsmith and
had him make me a new leg out of tin.  The leg worked very well, once I
was used to it.  But my action angered the Wicked Witch of the East,
for she had promised the old woman I should not marry the pretty
Munchkin girl.  When I began chopping again, my axe slipped and cut off
my right leg.  Again I went to the tinsmith, and again he made me a leg
out of tin.  After this the enchanted axe cut off my arms, one after
the other; but, nothing daunted, I had them replaced with tin ones.
The Wicked Witch then made the axe slip and cut off my head, and at
first I thought that was the end of me.  But the tinsmith happened to
come along, and he made me a new head out of tin.

"I thought I had beaten the Wicked Witch then, and I worked harder than
ever; but I little knew how cruel my enemy could be.  She thought of a
new way to kill my love for the beautiful Munchkin maiden, and made my
axe slip again, so that it cut right through my body, splitting me into
two halves.  Once more the tinsmith came to my help and made me a body
of tin, fastening my tin arms and legs and head to it, by means of
joints, so that I could move around as well as ever.  But, alas!  I had
now no heart, so that I lost all my love for the Munchkin girl, and did
not care whether I married her or not.  I suppose she is still living
with the old woman, waiting for me to come after her.

"My body shone so brightly in the sun that I felt very proud of it and
it did not matter now if my axe slipped, for it could not cut me.
There was only one danger--that my joints would rust; but I kept an
oil-can in my cottage and took care to oil myself whenever I needed it.
However, there came a day when I forgot to do this, and, being caught
in a rainstorm, before I thought of the danger my joints had rusted,
and I was left to stand in the woods until you came to help me.  It was
a terrible thing to undergo, but during the year I stood there I had
time to think that the greatest loss I had known was the loss of my
heart.  While I was in love I was the happiest man on earth; but no one
can love who has not a heart, and so I am resolved to ask Oz to give me
one.  If he does, I will go back to the Munchkin maiden and marry her."

Both Dorothy and the Scarecrow had been greatly interested in the story
of the Tin Woodman, and now they knew why he was so anxious to get a
new heart.

"All the same," said the Scarecrow, "I shall ask for brains instead of
a heart; for a fool would not know what to do with a heart if he had
one."

"I shall take the heart," returned the Tin Woodman; "for brains do not
make one happy, and happiness is the best thing in the world."

Dorothy did not say anything, for she was puzzled to know which of her
two friends was right, and she decided if she could only get back to
Kansas and Aunt Em, it did not matter so much whether the Woodman had
no brains and the Scarecrow no heart, or each got what he wanted.

What worried her most was that the bread was nearly gone, and another
meal for herself and Toto would empty the basket.  To be sure, neither
the Woodman nor the Scarecrow ever ate anything, but she was not made
of tin nor straw, and could not live unless she was fed.




6.  The Cowardly Lion


All this time Dorothy and her companions had been walking through the
thick woods.  The road was still paved with yellow brick, but these
were much covered by dried branches and dead leaves from the trees, and
the walking was not at all good.

There were few birds in this part of the forest, for birds love the
open country where there is plenty of sunshine.  But now and then there
came a deep growl from some wild animal hidden among the trees.  These
sounds made the little girl's heart beat fast, for she did not know
what made them; but Toto knew, and he walked close to Dorothy's side,
and did not even bark in return.

"How long will it be," the child asked of the Tin Woodman, "before we
are out of the forest?"

"I cannot tell," was the answer, "for I have never been to the Emerald
City.  But my father went there once, when I was a boy, and he said it
was a long journey through a dangerous country, although nearer to the
city where Oz dwells the country is beautiful.  But I am not afraid so
long as I have my oil-can, and nothing can hurt the Scarecrow, while
you bear upon your forehead the mark of the Good Witch's kiss, and that
will protect you from harm."

"But Toto!" said the girl anxiously.  "What will protect him?"

"We must protect him ourselves if he is in danger," replied the Tin
Woodman.

Just as he spoke there came from the forest a terrible roar, and the
next moment a great Lion bounded into the road.  With one blow of his
paw he sent the Scarecrow spinning over and over to the edge of the
road, and then he struck at the Tin Woodman with his sharp claws.  But,
to the Lion's surprise, he could make no impression on the tin,
although the Woodman fell over in the road and lay still.

Little Toto, now that he had an enemy to face, ran barking toward the
Lion, and the great beast had opened his mouth to bite the dog, when
Dorothy, fearing Toto would be killed, and heedless of danger, rushed
forward and slapped the Lion upon his nose as hard as she could, while
she cried out:

"Don't you dare to bite Toto!  You ought to be ashamed of yourself, a
big beast like you, to bite a poor little dog!"

"I didn't bite him," said the Lion, as he rubbed his nose with his paw
where Dorothy had hit it.

"No, but you tried to," she retorted.  "You are nothing but a big
coward."

"I know it," said the Lion, hanging his head in shame.  "I've always
known it.  But how can I help it?"

"I don't know, I'm sure.  To think of your striking a stuffed man, like
the poor Scarecrow!"

"Is he stuffed?" asked the Lion in surprise, as he watched her pick up
the Scarecrow and set him upon his feet, while she patted him into
shape again.

"Of course he's stuffed," replied Dorothy, who was still angry.

"That's why he went over so easily," remarked the Lion.  "It astonished
me to see him whirl around so.  Is the other one stuffed also?"

"No," said Dorothy, "he's made of tin."  And she helped the Woodman up
again.

"That's why he nearly blunted my claws," said the Lion.  "When they
scratched against the tin it made a cold shiver run down my back.  What
is that little animal you are so tender of?"

"He is my dog, Toto," answered Dorothy.

"Is he made of tin, or stuffed?" asked the Lion.

"Neither.  He's a--a--a meat dog," said the girl.

"Oh!  He's a curious animal and seems remarkably small, now that I look
at him.  No one would think of biting such a little thing, except a
coward like me," continued the Lion sadly.

"What makes you a coward?" asked Dorothy, looking at the great beast in
wonder, for he was as big as a small horse.

"It's a mystery," replied the Lion.  "I suppose I was born that way.
All the other animals in the forest naturally expect me to be brave,
for the Lion is everywhere thought to be the King of Beasts.  I learned
that if I roared very loudly every living thing was frightened and got
out of my way.  Whenever I've met a man I've been awfully scared; but I
just roared at him, and he has always run away as fast as he could go.
If the elephants and the tigers and the bears had ever tried to fight
me, I should have run myself--I'm such a coward; but just as soon as
they hear me roar they all try to get away from me, and of course I let
them go."

"But that isn't right.  The King of Beasts shouldn't be a coward," said
the Scarecrow.

"I know it," returned the Lion, wiping a tear from his eye with the tip
of his tail.  "It is my great sorrow, and makes my life very unhappy.
But whenever there is danger, my heart begins to beat fast."

"Perhaps you have heart disease," said the Tin Woodman.

"It may be," said the Lion.

"If you have," continued the Tin Woodman, "you ought to be glad, for it
proves you have a heart.  For my part, I have no heart; so I cannot
have heart disease."

"Perhaps," said the Lion thoughtfully, "if I had no heart I should not
be a coward."

"Have you brains?" asked the Scarecrow.

"I suppose so.  I've never looked to see," replied the Lion.

"I am going to the Great Oz to ask him to give me some," remarked the
Scarecrow, "for my head is stuffed with straw."

"And I am going to ask him to give me a heart," said the Woodman.

"And I am going to ask him to send Toto and me back to Kansas," added
Dorothy.

"Do you think Oz could give me courage?" asked the Cowardly Lion.

"Just as easily as he could give me brains," said the Scarecrow.

"Or give me a heart," said the Tin Woodman.

"Or send me back to Kansas," said Dorothy.

"Then, if you don't mind, I'll go with you," said the Lion, "for my
life is simply unbearable without a bit of courage."

"You will be very welcome," answered Dorothy, "for you will help to
keep away the other wild beasts.  It seems to me they must be more
cowardly than you are if they allow you to scare them so easily."

"They really are," said the Lion, "but that doesn't make me any braver,
and as long as I know myself to be a coward I shall be unhappy."

So once more the little company set off upon the journey, the Lion
walking with stately strides at Dorothy's side.  Toto did not approve of
this new comrade at first, for he could not forget how nearly he had
been crushed between the Lion's great jaws.  But after a time he became
more at ease, and presently Toto and the Cowardly Lion had grown to be
good friends.

During the rest of that day there was no other adventure to mar the
peace of their journey.  Once, indeed, the Tin Woodman stepped upon a
beetle that was crawling along the road, and killed the poor little
thing.  This made the Tin Woodman very unhappy, for he was always
careful not to hurt any living creature; and as he walked along he wept
several tears of sorrow and regret.  These tears ran slowly down his
face and over the hinges of his jaw, and there they rusted.  When
Dorothy presently asked him a question the Tin Woodman could not open
his mouth, for his jaws were tightly rusted together.  He became
greatly frightened at this and made many motions to Dorothy to relieve
him, but she could not understand.  The Lion was also puzzled to know
what was wrong.  But the Scarecrow seized the oil-can from Dorothy's
basket and oiled the Woodman's jaws, so that after a few moments he
could talk as well as before.

"This will serve me a lesson," said he, "to look where I step.  For if
I should kill another bug or beetle I should surely cry again, and
crying rusts my jaws so that I cannot speak."

Thereafter he walked very carefully, with his eyes on the road, and
when he saw a tiny ant toiling by he would step over it, so as not to
harm it.  The Tin Woodman knew very well he had no heart, and therefore
he took great care never to be cruel or unkind to anything.

"You people with hearts," he said, "have something to guide you, and
need never do wrong; but I have no heart, and so I must be very
careful.  When Oz gives me a heart of course I needn't mind so much."




7.  The Journey to the Great Oz


They were obliged to camp out that night under a large tree in the
forest, for there were no houses near.  The tree made a good, thick
covering to protect them from the dew, and the Tin Woodman chopped a
great pile of wood with his axe and Dorothy built a splendid fire that
warmed her and made her feel less lonely.  She and Toto ate the last of
their bread, and now she did not know what they would do for breakfast.

"If you wish," said the Lion, "I will go into the forest and kill a
deer for you.  You can roast it by the fire, since your tastes are so
peculiar that you prefer cooked food, and then you will have a very
good breakfast."

"Don't!  Please don't," begged the Tin Woodman.  "I should certainly
weep if you killed a poor deer, and then my jaws would rust again."

But the Lion went away into the forest and found his own supper, and no
one ever knew what it was, for he didn't mention it.  And the Scarecrow
found a tree full of nuts and filled Dorothy's basket with them, so
that she would not be hungry for a long time.  She thought this was
very kind and thoughtful of the Scarecrow, but she laughed heartily at
the awkward way in which the poor creature picked up the nuts.  His
padded hands were so clumsy and the nuts were so small that he dropped
almost as many as he put in the basket.  But the Scarecrow did not mind
how long it took him to fill the basket, for it enabled him to keep
away from the fire, as he feared a spark might get into his straw and
burn him up.  So he kept a good distance away from the flames, and only
came near to cover Dorothy with dry leaves when she lay down to sleep.
These kept her very snug and warm, and she slept soundly until morning.

When it was daylight, the girl bathed her face in a little rippling
brook, and soon after they all started toward the Emerald City.

This was to be an eventful day for the travelers.  They had hardly been
walking an hour when they saw before them a great ditch that crossed
the road and divided the forest as far as they could see on either
side.  It was a very wide ditch, and when they crept up to the edge and
looked into it they could see it was also very deep, and there were
many big, jagged rocks at the bottom.  The sides were so steep that
none of them could climb down, and for a moment it seemed that their
journey must end.

"What shall we do?" asked Dorothy despairingly.

"I haven't the faintest idea," said the Tin Woodman, and the Lion shook
his shaggy mane and looked thoughtful.

But the Scarecrow said, "We cannot fly, that is certain.  Neither can
we climb down into this great ditch.  Therefore, if we cannot jump over
it, we must stop where we are."

"I think I could jump over it," said the Cowardly Lion, after measuring
the distance carefully in his mind.

"Then we are all right," answered the Scarecrow, "for you can carry us
all over on your back, one at a time."

"Well, I'll try it," said the Lion.  "Who will go first?"

"I will," declared the Scarecrow, "for, if you found that you could not
jump over the gulf, Dorothy would be killed, or the Tin Woodman badly
dented on the rocks below.  But if I am on your back it will not matter
so much, for the fall would not hurt me at all."

"I am terribly afraid of falling, myself," said the Cowardly Lion, "but
I suppose there is nothing to do but try it.  So get on my back and we
will make the attempt."

The Scarecrow sat upon the Lion's back, and the big beast walked to the
edge of the gulf and crouched down.

"Why don't you run and jump?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Because that isn't the way we Lions do these things," he replied.
Then giving a great spring, he shot through the air and landed safely
on the other side.  They were all greatly pleased to see how easily he
did it, and after the Scarecrow had got down from his back the Lion
sprang across the ditch again.

Dorothy thought she would go next; so she took Toto in her arms and
climbed on the Lion's back, holding tightly to his mane with one hand.
The next moment it seemed as if she were flying through the air; and
then, before she had time to think about it, she was safe on the other
side.  The Lion went back a third time and got the Tin Woodman, and
then they all sat down for a few moments to give the beast a chance to
rest, for his great leaps had made his breath short, and he panted like
a big dog that has been running too long.

They found the forest very thick on this side, and it looked dark and
gloomy.  After the Lion had rested they started along the road of
yellow brick, silently wondering, each in his own mind, if ever they
would come to the end of the woods and reach the bright sunshine again.
To add to their discomfort, they soon heard strange noises in the
depths of the forest, and the Lion whispered to them that it was in
this part of the country that the Kalidahs lived.

"What are the Kalidahs?" asked the girl.

"They are monstrous beasts with bodies like bears and heads like
tigers," replied the Lion, "and with claws so long and sharp that they
could tear me in two as easily as I could kill Toto.  I'm terribly
afraid of the Kalidahs."

"I'm not surprised that you are," returned Dorothy.  "They must be
dreadful beasts."

The Lion was about to reply when suddenly they came to another gulf
across the road.  But this one was so broad and deep that the Lion knew
at once he could not leap across it.

So they sat down to consider what they should do, and after serious
thought the Scarecrow said:

"Here is a great tree, standing close to the ditch.  If the Tin Woodman
can chop it down, so that it will fall to the other side, we can walk
across it easily."

"That is a first-rate idea," said the Lion.  "One would almost suspect
you had brains in your head, instead of straw."

The Woodman set to work at once, and so sharp was his axe that the tree
was soon chopped nearly through.  Then the Lion put his strong front
legs against the tree and pushed with all his might, and slowly the big
tree tipped and fell with a crash across the ditch, with its top
branches on the other side.

They had just started to cross this queer bridge when a sharp growl
made them all look up, and to their horror they saw running toward them
two great beasts with bodies like bears and heads like tigers.

"They are the Kalidahs!" said the Cowardly Lion, beginning to tremble.

"Quick!" cried the Scarecrow.  "Let us cross over."

So Dorothy went first, holding Toto in her arms, the Tin Woodman
followed, and the Scarecrow came next.  The Lion, although he was
certainly afraid, turned to face the Kalidahs, and then he gave so loud
and terrible a roar that Dorothy screamed and the Scarecrow fell over
backward, while even the fierce beasts stopped short and looked at him
in surprise.

But, seeing they were bigger than the Lion, and remembering that there
were two of them and only one of him, the Kalidahs again rushed
forward, and the Lion crossed over the tree and turned to see what they
would do next.  Without stopping an instant the fierce beasts also
began to cross the tree.  And the Lion said to Dorothy:

"We are lost, for they will surely tear us to pieces with their sharp
claws.  But stand close behind me, and I will fight them as long as I
am alive."

"Wait a minute!" called the Scarecrow.  He had been thinking what was
best to be done, and now he asked the Woodman to chop away the end of
the tree that rested on their side of the ditch.  The Tin Woodman began
to use his axe at once, and, just as the two Kalidahs were nearly
across, the tree fell with a crash into the gulf, carrying the ugly,
snarling brutes with it, and both were dashed to pieces on the sharp
rocks at the bottom.

"Well," said the Cowardly Lion, drawing a long breath of relief, "I see
we are going to live a little while longer, and I am glad of it, for it
must be a very uncomfortable thing not to be alive.  Those creatures
frightened me so badly that my heart is beating yet."

"Ah," said the Tin Woodman sadly, "I wish I had a heart to beat."

This adventure made the travelers more anxious than ever to get out of
the forest, and they walked so fast that Dorothy became tired, and had
to ride on the Lion's back.  To their great joy the trees became
thinner the farther they advanced, and in the afternoon they suddenly
came upon a broad river, flowing swiftly just before them.  On the
other side of the water they could see the road of yellow brick running
through a beautiful country, with green meadows dotted with bright
flowers and all the road bordered with trees hanging full of delicious
fruits.  They were greatly pleased to see this delightful country
before them.

"How shall we cross the river?" asked Dorothy.

"That is easily done," replied the Scarecrow.  "The Tin Woodman must
build us a raft, so we can float to the other side."

So the Woodman took his axe and began to chop down small trees to make
a raft, and while he was busy at this the Scarecrow found on the
riverbank a tree full of fine fruit.  This pleased Dorothy, who had
eaten nothing but nuts all day, and she made a hearty meal of the ripe
fruit.

But it takes time to make a raft, even when one is as industrious and
untiring as the Tin Woodman, and when night came the work was not done.
So they found a cozy place under the trees where they slept well until
the morning; and Dorothy dreamed of the Emerald City, and of the good
Wizard Oz, who would soon send her back to her own home again.




8.  The Deadly Poppy Field


Our little party of travelers awakened the next morning refreshed and
full of hope, and Dorothy breakfasted like a princess off peaches and
plums from the trees beside the river.  Behind them was the dark forest
they had passed safely through, although they had suffered many
discouragements; but before them was a lovely, sunny country that
seemed to beckon them on to the Emerald City.

To be sure, the broad river now cut them off from this beautiful land.
But the raft was nearly done, and after the Tin Woodman had cut a few
more logs and fastened them together with wooden pins, they were ready
to start.  Dorothy sat down in the middle of the raft and held Toto in
her arms.  When the Cowardly Lion stepped upon the raft it tipped
badly, for he was big and heavy; but the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman
stood upon the other end to steady it, and they had long poles in their
hands to push the raft through the water.

They got along quite well at first, but when they reached the middle of
the river the swift current swept the raft downstream, farther and
farther away from the road of yellow brick.  And the water grew so deep
that the long poles would not touch the bottom.

"This is bad," said the Tin Woodman, "for if we cannot get to the land
we shall be carried into the country of the Wicked Witch of the West,
and she will enchant us and make us her slaves."

"And then I should get no brains," said the Scarecrow.

"And I should get no courage," said the Cowardly Lion.

"And I should get no heart," said the Tin Woodman.

"And I should never get back to Kansas," said Dorothy.

"We must certainly get to the Emerald City if we can," the Scarecrow
continued, and he pushed so hard on his long pole that it stuck fast in
the mud at the bottom of the river.  Then, before he could pull it out
again--or let go--the raft was swept away, and the poor Scarecrow was left
clinging to the pole in the middle of the river.

"Good-bye!" he called after them, and they were very sorry to leave
him.  Indeed, the Tin Woodman began to cry, but fortunately remembered
that he might rust, and so dried his tears on Dorothy's apron.

Of course this was a bad thing for the Scarecrow.

"I am now worse off than when I first met Dorothy," he thought.  "Then,
I was stuck on a pole in a cornfield, where I could make-believe scare
the crows, at any rate.  But surely there is no use for a Scarecrow
stuck on a pole in the middle of a river.  I am afraid I shall never
have any brains, after all!"

Down the stream the raft floated, and the poor Scarecrow was left far
behind.  Then the Lion said:

"Something must be done to save us.  I think I can swim to the shore
and pull the raft after me, if you will only hold fast to the tip of my
tail."

So he sprang into the water, and the Tin Woodman caught fast hold of
his tail.  Then the Lion began to swim with all his might toward the
shore.  It was hard work, although he was so big; but by and by they
were drawn out of the current, and then Dorothy took the Tin Woodman's
long pole and helped push the raft to the land.

They were all tired out when they reached the shore at last and stepped
off upon the pretty green grass, and they also knew that the stream had
carried them a long way past the road of yellow brick that led to the
Emerald City.

"What shall we do now?" asked the Tin Woodman, as the Lion lay down on
the grass to let the sun dry him.

"We must get back to the road, in some way," said Dorothy.

"The best plan will be to walk along the riverbank until we come to the
road again," remarked the Lion.

So, when they were rested, Dorothy picked up her basket and they
started along the grassy bank, to the road from which the river had
carried them.  It was a lovely country, with plenty of flowers and
fruit trees and sunshine to cheer them, and had they not felt so sorry
for the poor Scarecrow, they could have been very happy.

They walked along as fast as they could, Dorothy only stopping once to
pick a beautiful flower; and after a time the Tin Woodman cried out:
"Look!"

Then they all looked at the river and saw the Scarecrow perched upon
his pole in the middle of the water, looking very lonely and sad.

"What can we do to save him?" asked Dorothy.

The Lion and the Woodman both shook their heads, for they did not know.
So they sat down upon the bank and gazed wistfully at the Scarecrow
until a Stork flew by, who, upon seeing them, stopped to rest at the
water's edge.

"Who are you and where are you going?" asked the Stork.

"I am Dorothy," answered the girl, "and these are my friends, the Tin
Woodman and the Cowardly Lion;  and we are going to the Emerald City."

"This isn't the road," said the Stork, as she twisted her long neck and
looked sharply at the queer party.

"I know it," returned Dorothy, "but we have lost the Scarecrow, and are
wondering how we shall get him again."

"Where is he?" asked the Stork.

"Over there in the river," answered the little girl.

"If he wasn't so big and heavy I would get him for you," remarked the
Stork.

"He isn't heavy a bit," said Dorothy eagerly, "for he is stuffed with
straw; and if you will bring him back to us, we shall thank you ever
and ever so much."

"Well, I'll try," said the Stork, "but if I find he is too heavy to
carry I shall have to drop him in the river again."

So the big bird flew into the air and over the water till she came to
where the Scarecrow was perched upon his pole.  Then the Stork with her
great claws grabbed the Scarecrow by the arm and carried him up into
the air and back to the bank, where Dorothy and the Lion and the Tin
Woodman and Toto were sitting.

When the Scarecrow found himself among his friends again, he was so
happy that he hugged them all, even the Lion and Toto; and as they
walked along he sang "Tol-de-ri-de-oh!" at every step, he felt so gay.

"I was afraid I should have to stay in the river forever," he said,
"but the kind Stork saved me, and if I ever get any brains I shall find
the Stork again and do her some kindness in return."

"That's all right," said the Stork, who was flying along beside them.
"I always like to help anyone in trouble.  But I must go now, for my
babies are waiting in the nest for me.  I hope you will find the
Emerald City and that Oz will help you."

"Thank you," replied Dorothy, and then the kind Stork flew into the air
and was soon out of sight.

They walked along listening to the singing of the brightly colored
birds and looking at the lovely flowers which now became so thick that
the ground was carpeted with them.  There were big yellow and white and
blue and purple blossoms, besides great clusters of scarlet poppies,
which were so brilliant in color they almost dazzled Dorothy's eyes.

"Aren't they beautiful?" the girl asked, as she breathed in the spicy
scent of the bright flowers.

"I suppose so," answered the Scarecrow.  "When I have brains, I shall
probably like them better."

"If I only had a heart, I should love them," added the Tin Woodman.

"I always did like flowers," said the Lion.  "They seem so helpless
and frail.  But there are none in the forest so bright as these."

They now came upon more and more of the big scarlet poppies, and fewer
and fewer of the other flowers; and soon they found themselves in the
midst of a great meadow of poppies.  Now it is well known that when
there are many of these flowers together their odor is so powerful that
anyone who breathes it falls asleep, and if the sleeper is not carried
away from the scent of the flowers, he sleeps on and on forever.  But
Dorothy did not know this, nor could she get away from the bright red
flowers that were everywhere about; so presently her eyes grew heavy
and she felt she must sit down to rest and to sleep.

But the Tin Woodman would not let her do this.

"We must hurry and get back to the road of yellow brick before dark,"
he said; and the Scarecrow agreed with him.  So they kept walking until
Dorothy could stand no longer.  Her eyes closed in spite of herself and
she forgot where she was and fell among the poppies, fast asleep.

"What shall we do?" asked the Tin Woodman.

"If we leave her here she will die," said the Lion.  "The smell of the
flowers is killing us all.  I myself can scarcely keep my eyes open,
and the dog is asleep already."

It was true; Toto had fallen down beside his little mistress.  But the
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, not being made of flesh, were not
troubled by the scent of the flowers.

"Run fast," said the Scarecrow to the Lion, "and get out of this deadly
flower bed as soon as you can.  We will bring the little girl with us,
but if you should fall asleep you are too big to be carried."

So the Lion aroused himself and bounded forward as fast as he could go.
In a moment he was out of sight.

"Let us make a chair with our hands and carry her," said the Scarecrow.
So they picked up Toto and put the dog in Dorothy's lap, and then they
made a chair with their hands for the seat and their arms for the arms
and carried the sleeping girl between them through the flowers.

On and on they walked, and it seemed that the great carpet of deadly
flowers that surrounded them would never end.  They followed the bend
of the river, and at last came upon their friend the Lion, lying fast
asleep among the poppies.  The flowers had been too strong for the huge
beast and he had given up at last, and fallen only a short distance
from the end of the poppy bed, where the sweet grass spread in
beautiful green fields before them.

"We can do nothing for him," said the Tin Woodman, sadly; "for he is
much too heavy to lift.  We must leave him here to sleep on forever,
and perhaps he will dream that he has found courage at last."

"I'm sorry," said the Scarecrow.  "The Lion was a very good comrade for
one so cowardly.  But let us go on."

They carried the sleeping girl to a pretty spot beside the river, far
enough from the poppy field to prevent her breathing any more of the
poison of the flowers, and here they laid her gently on the soft grass
and waited for the fresh breeze to waken her.




9.  The Queen of the Field Mice


"We cannot be far from the road of yellow brick, now," remarked the
Scarecrow, as he stood beside the girl, "for we have come nearly as far
as the river carried us away."

The Tin Woodman was about to reply when he heard a low growl, and
turning his head (which worked beautifully on hinges) he saw a strange
beast come bounding over the grass toward them.  It was, indeed, a
great yellow Wildcat, and the Woodman thought it must be chasing
something, for its ears were lying close to its head and its mouth was
wide open, showing two rows of ugly teeth, while its red eyes glowed
like balls of fire.  As it came nearer the Tin Woodman saw that running
before the beast was a little gray field mouse, and although he had no
heart he knew it was wrong for the Wildcat to try to kill such a
pretty, harmless creature.

So the Woodman raised his axe, and as the Wildcat ran by he gave it a
quick blow that cut the beast's head clean off from its body, and it
rolled over at his feet in two pieces.

The field mouse, now that it was freed from its enemy, stopped short;
and coming slowly up to the Woodman it said, in a squeaky little voice:

"Oh, thank you!  Thank you ever so much for saving my life."

"Don't speak of it, I beg of you," replied the Woodman.  "I have no
heart, you know, so I am careful to help all those who may need a
friend, even if it happens to be only a mouse."

"Only a mouse!" cried the little animal, indignantly.  "Why, I am a
Queen--the Queen of all the Field Mice!"

"Oh, indeed," said the Woodman, making a bow.

"Therefore you have done a great deed, as well as a brave one, in
saving my life," added the Queen.

At that moment several mice were seen running up as fast as their
little legs could carry them, and when they saw their Queen they
exclaimed:

"Oh, your Majesty, we thought you would be killed!  How did you manage
to escape the great Wildcat?"  They all bowed so low to the little
Queen that they almost stood upon their heads.

"This funny tin man," she answered, "killed the Wildcat and saved my
life.  So hereafter you must all serve him, and obey his slightest
wish."

"We will!" cried all the mice, in a shrill chorus.  And then they
scampered in all directions, for Toto had awakened from his sleep, and
seeing all these mice around him he gave one bark of delight and jumped
right into the middle of the group.  Toto had always loved to chase
mice when he lived in Kansas, and he saw no harm in it.

But the Tin Woodman caught the dog in his arms and held him tight,
while he called to the mice, "Come back!  Come back!  Toto shall not
hurt you."

At this the Queen of the Mice stuck her head out from underneath a
clump of grass and asked, in a timid voice, "Are you sure he will not
bite us?"

"I will not let him," said the Woodman; "so do not be afraid."

One by one the mice came creeping back, and Toto did not bark again,
although he tried to get out of the Woodman's arms, and would have
bitten him had he not known very well he was made of tin.  Finally one
of the biggest mice spoke.

"Is there anything we can do," it asked, "to repay you for saving the
life of our Queen?"

"Nothing that I know of," answered the Woodman; but the Scarecrow, who
had been trying to think, but could not because his head was stuffed
with straw, said, quickly, "Oh, yes; you can save our friend, the
Cowardly Lion, who is asleep in the poppy bed."

"A Lion!" cried the little Queen.  "Why, he would eat us all up."

"Oh, no," declared the Scarecrow; "this Lion is a coward."

"Really?" asked the Mouse.

"He says so himself," answered the Scarecrow, "and he would never hurt
anyone who is our friend.  If you will help us to save him I promise
that he shall treat you all with kindness."

"Very well," said the Queen, "we trust you.  But what shall we do?"

"Are there many of these mice which call you Queen and are willing to
obey you?"

"Oh, yes; there are thousands," she replied.

"Then send for them all to come here as soon as possible, and let each
one bring a long piece of string."

The Queen turned to the mice that attended her and told them to go at
once and get all her people.  As soon as they heard her orders they ran
away in every direction as fast as possible.

"Now," said the Scarecrow to the Tin Woodman, "you must go to those
trees by the riverside and make a truck that will carry the Lion."

So the Woodman went at once to the trees and began to work; and he soon
made a truck out of the limbs of trees, from which he chopped away all
the leaves and branches.  He fastened it together with wooden pegs and
made the four wheels out of short pieces of a big tree trunk.  So fast
and so well did he work that by the time the mice began to arrive the
truck was all ready for them.

They came from all directions, and there were thousands of them: big
mice and little mice and middle-sized mice; and each one brought a
piece of string in his mouth.  It was about this time that Dorothy woke
from her long sleep and opened her eyes.  She was greatly astonished to
find herself lying upon the grass, with thousands of mice standing
around and looking at her timidly.  But the Scarecrow told her about
everything, and turning to the dignified little Mouse, he said:

"Permit me to introduce to you her Majesty, the Queen."

Dorothy nodded gravely and the Queen made a curtsy, after which she
became quite friendly with the little girl.

The Scarecrow and the Woodman now began to fasten the mice to the
truck, using the strings they had brought.  One end of a string was
tied around the neck of each mouse and the other end to the truck.  Of
course the truck was a thousand times bigger than any of the mice who
were to draw it; but when all the mice had been harnessed, they were
able to pull it quite easily.  Even the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman
could sit on it, and were drawn swiftly by their queer little horses to
the place where the Lion lay asleep.

After a great deal of hard work, for the Lion was heavy, they managed
to get him up on the truck.  Then the Queen hurriedly gave her people
the order to start, for she feared if the mice stayed among the poppies
too long they also would fall asleep.

At first the little creatures, many though they were, could hardly stir
the heavily loaded truck; but the Woodman and the Scarecrow both pushed
from behind, and they got along better.  Soon they rolled the Lion out
of the poppy bed to the green fields, where he could breathe the sweet,
fresh air again, instead of the poisonous scent of the flowers.

Dorothy came to meet them and thanked the little mice warmly for saving
her companion from death.  She had grown so fond of the big Lion she
was glad he had been rescued.

Then the mice were unharnessed from the truck and scampered away
through the grass to their homes.  The Queen of the Mice was the last
to leave.

"If ever you need us again," she said, "come out into the field and
call, and we shall hear you and come to your assistance.  Good-bye!"

"Good-bye!" they all answered, and away the Queen ran, while Dorothy
held Toto tightly lest he should run after her and frighten her.

After this they sat down beside the Lion until he should awaken; and
the Scarecrow brought Dorothy some fruit from a tree near by, which she
ate for her dinner.




10.  The Guardian of the Gate


It was some time before the Cowardly Lion awakened, for he had lain
among the poppies a long while, breathing in their deadly fragrance;
but when he did open his eyes and roll off the truck he was very glad
to find himself still alive.

"I ran as fast as I could," he said, sitting down and yawning, "but the
flowers were too strong for me.  How did you get me out?"

Then they told him of the field mice, and how they had generously saved
him from death; and the Cowardly Lion laughed, and said:

"I have always thought myself very big and terrible; yet such little
things as flowers came near to killing me, and such small animals as
mice have saved my life.  How strange it all is!  But, comrades, what
shall we do now?"

"We must journey on until we find the road of yellow brick again," said
Dorothy, "and then we can keep on to the Emerald City."

So, the Lion being fully refreshed, and feeling quite himself again,
they all started upon the journey, greatly enjoying the walk through
the soft, fresh grass; and it was not long before they reached the road
of yellow brick and turned again toward the Emerald City where the
Great Oz dwelt.

The road was smooth and well paved, now, and the country about was
beautiful, so that the travelers rejoiced in leaving the forest far
behind, and with it the many dangers they had met in its gloomy shades.
Once more they could see fences built beside the road; but these were
painted green, and when they came to a small house, in which a farmer
evidently lived, that also was painted green.  They passed by several
of these houses during the afternoon, and sometimes people came to the
doors and looked at them as if they would like to ask questions; but no
one came near them nor spoke to them because of the great Lion, of
which they were very much afraid.  The people were all dressed in
clothing of a lovely emerald-green color and wore peaked hats like
those of the Munchkins.

"This must be the Land of Oz," said Dorothy, "and we are surely getting
near the Emerald City."

"Yes," answered the Scarecrow.  "Everything is green here, while in the
country of the Munchkins blue was the favorite color.  But the people
do not seem to be as friendly as the Munchkins, and I'm afraid we shall
be unable to find a place to pass the night."

"I should like something to eat besides fruit," said the girl, "and I'm
sure Toto is nearly starved.  Let us stop at the next house and talk to
the people."

So, when they came to a good-sized farmhouse, Dorothy walked boldly up
to the door and knocked.

A woman opened it just far enough to look out, and said, "What do you
want, child, and why is that great Lion with you?"

"We wish to pass the night with you, if you will allow us," answered
Dorothy; "and the Lion is my friend and comrade, and would not hurt you
for the world."

"Is he tame?" asked the woman, opening the door a little wider.

"Oh, yes," said the girl, "and he is a great coward, too.  He will be
more afraid of you than you are of him."

"Well," said the woman, after thinking it over and taking another peep
at the Lion, "if that is the case you may come in, and I will give you
some supper and a place to sleep."

So they all entered the house, where there were, besides the woman, two
children and a man.  The man had hurt his leg, and was lying on the
couch in a corner.  They seemed greatly surprised to see so strange a
company, and while the woman was busy laying the table the man asked:

"Where are you all going?"

"To the Emerald City," said Dorothy, "to see the Great Oz."

"Oh, indeed!" exclaimed the man.  "Are you sure that Oz will see you?"

"Why not?" she replied.

"Why, it is said that he never lets anyone come into his presence.  I
have been to the Emerald City many times, and it is a beautiful and
wonderful place; but I have never been permitted to see the Great Oz,
nor do I know of any living person who has seen him."

"Does he never go out?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Never.  He sits day after day in the great Throne Room of his Palace,
and even those who wait upon him do not see him face to face."

"What is he like?" asked the girl.

"That is hard to tell," said the man thoughtfully.  "You see, Oz is a
Great Wizard, and can take on any form he wishes.  So that some say he
looks like a bird; and some say he looks like an elephant; and some say
he looks like a cat.  To others he appears as a beautiful fairy, or a
brownie, or in any other form that pleases him.  But who the real Oz
is, when he is in his own form, no living person can tell."

"That is very strange," said Dorothy, "but we must try, in some way, to
see him, or we shall have made our journey for nothing."

"Why do you wish to see the terrible Oz?" asked the man.

"I want him to give me some brains," said the Scarecrow eagerly.

"Oh, Oz could do that easily enough," declared the man.  "He has more
brains than he needs."

"And I want him to give me a heart," said the Tin Woodman.

"That will not trouble him," continued the man, "for Oz has a large
collection of hearts, of all sizes and shapes."

"And I want him to give me courage," said the Cowardly Lion.

"Oz keeps a great pot of courage in his Throne Room," said the man,
"which he has covered with a golden plate, to keep it from running
over.  He will be glad to give you some."

"And I want him to send me back to Kansas," said Dorothy.

"Where is Kansas?" asked the man, with surprise.

"I don't know," replied Dorothy sorrowfully, "but it is my home, and
I'm sure it's somewhere."

"Very likely.  Well, Oz can do anything; so I suppose he will find
Kansas for you.  But first you must get to see him, and that will be a
hard task; for the Great Wizard does not like to see anyone, and he
usually has his own way.  But what do YOU want?" he continued, speaking
to Toto.  Toto only wagged his tail; for, strange to say, he could not
speak.

The woman now called to them that supper was ready, so they gathered
around the table and Dorothy ate some delicious porridge and a dish of
scrambled eggs and a plate of nice white bread, and enjoyed her meal.
The Lion ate some of the porridge, but did not care for it, saying it
was made from oats and oats were food for horses, not for lions.  The
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman ate nothing at all.  Toto ate a little of
everything, and was glad to get a good supper again.

The woman now gave Dorothy a bed to sleep in, and Toto lay down beside
her, while the Lion guarded the door of her room so she might not be
disturbed.  The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman stood up in a corner and
kept quiet all night, although of course they could not sleep.

The next morning, as soon as the sun was up, they started on their way,
and soon saw a beautiful green glow in the sky just before them.

"That must be the Emerald City," said Dorothy.

As they walked on, the green glow became brighter and brighter, and it
seemed that at last they were nearing the end of their travels.  Yet it
was afternoon before they came to the great wall that surrounded the
City.  It was high and thick and of a bright green color.

In front of them, and at the end of the road of yellow brick, was a big
gate, all studded with emeralds that glittered so in the sun that even
the painted eyes of the Scarecrow were dazzled by their brilliancy.

There was a bell beside the gate, and Dorothy pushed the button and
heard a silvery tinkle sound within.  Then the big gate swung slowly
open, and they all passed through and found themselves in a high arched
room, the walls of which glistened with countless emeralds.

Before them stood a little man about the same size as the Munchkins.
He was clothed all in green, from his head to his feet, and even his
skin was of a greenish tint.  At his side was a large green box.

When he saw Dorothy and her companions the man asked, "What do you wish
in the Emerald City?"

"We came here to see the Great Oz," said Dorothy.

The man was so surprised at this answer that he sat down to think it
over.

"It has been many years since anyone asked me to see Oz," he said,
shaking his head in perplexity.  "He is powerful and terrible, and if
you come on an idle or foolish errand to bother the wise reflections of
the Great Wizard, he might be angry and destroy you all in an instant."

"But it is not a foolish errand, nor an idle one," replied the
Scarecrow; "it is important.  And we have been told that Oz is a good
Wizard."

"So he is," said the green man, "and he rules the Emerald City wisely
and well.  But to those who are not honest, or who approach him from
curiosity, he is most terrible, and few have ever dared ask to see his
face.  I am the Guardian of the Gates, and since you demand to see the
Great Oz I must take you to his Palace.  But first you must put on the
spectacles."

"Why?" asked Dorothy.

"Because if you did not wear spectacles the brightness and glory of the
Emerald City would blind you.  Even those who live in the City must
wear spectacles night and day.  They are all locked on, for Oz so
ordered it when the City was first built, and I have the only key that
will unlock them."

He opened the big box, and Dorothy saw that it was filled with
spectacles of every size and shape.  All of them had green glasses in
them.  The Guardian of the Gates found a pair that would just fit
Dorothy and put them over her eyes.  There were two golden bands
fastened to them that passed around the back of her head, where they
were locked together by a little key that was at the end of a chain the
Guardian of the Gates wore around his neck.  When they were on, Dorothy
could not take them off had she wished, but of course she did not wish
to be blinded by the glare of the Emerald City, so she said nothing.

Then the green man fitted spectacles for the Scarecrow and the Tin
Woodman and the Lion, and even on little Toto; and all were locked fast
with the key.

Then the Guardian of the Gates put on his own glasses and told them he
was ready to show them to the Palace.  Taking a big golden key from a
peg on the wall, he opened another gate, and they all followed him
through the portal into the streets of the Emerald City.




11.  The Wonderful City of Oz


Even with eyes protected by the green spectacles, Dorothy and her
friends were at first dazzled by the brilliancy of the wonderful City.
The streets were lined with beautiful houses all built of green marble
and studded everywhere with sparkling emeralds.  They walked over a
pavement of the same green marble, and where the blocks were joined
together were rows of emeralds, set closely, and glittering in the
brightness of the sun.  The window panes were of green glass; even the
sky above the City had a green tint, and the rays of the sun were green.

There were many people--men, women, and children--walking about, and
these were all dressed in green clothes and had greenish skins.  They
looked at Dorothy and her strangely assorted company with wondering
eyes, and the children all ran away and hid behind their mothers when
they saw the Lion; but no one spoke to them.  Many shops stood in the
street, and Dorothy saw that everything in them was green.  Green candy
and green pop corn were offered for sale, as well as green shoes, green
hats, and green clothes of all sorts.  At one place a man was selling
green lemonade, and when the children bought it Dorothy could see that
they paid for it with green pennies.

There seemed to be no horses nor animals of any kind; the men carried
things around in little green carts, which they pushed before them.
Everyone seemed happy and contented and prosperous.

The Guardian of the Gates led them through the streets until they came
to a big building, exactly in the middle of the City, which was the
Palace of Oz, the Great Wizard.  There was a soldier before the door,
dressed in a green uniform and wearing a long green beard.

"Here are strangers," said the Guardian of the Gates to him, "and they
demand to see the Great Oz."

"Step inside," answered the soldier, "and I will carry your message to
him."

So they passed through the Palace Gates and were led into a big room
with a green carpet and lovely green furniture set with emeralds.  The
soldier made them all wipe their feet upon a green mat before entering
this room, and when they were seated he said politely:

"Please make yourselves comfortable while I go to the door of the
Throne Room and tell Oz you are here."

They had to wait a long time before the soldier returned.  When, at
last, he came back, Dorothy asked:

"Have you seen Oz?"

"Oh, no," returned the soldier; "I have never seen him.  But I spoke to
him as he sat behind his screen and gave him your message.  He said he
will grant you an audience, if you so desire; but each one of you must
enter his presence alone, and he will admit but one each day.
Therefore, as you must remain in the Palace for several days, I will
have you shown to rooms where you may rest in comfort after your
journey."

"Thank you," replied the girl; "that is very kind of Oz."

The soldier now blew upon a green whistle, and at once a young girl,
dressed in a pretty green silk gown, entered the room.  She had lovely
green hair and green eyes, and she bowed low before Dorothy as she
said, "Follow me and I will show you your room."

So Dorothy said good-bye to all her friends except Toto, and taking the
dog in her arms followed the green girl through seven passages and up
three flights of stairs until they came to a room at the front of the
Palace.  It was the sweetest little room in the world, with a soft
comfortable bed that had sheets of green silk and a green velvet
counterpane.  There was a tiny fountain in the middle of the room, that
shot a spray of green perfume into the air, to fall back into a
beautifully carved green marble basin.  Beautiful green flowers stood
in the windows, and there was a shelf with a row of little green books.
When Dorothy had time to open these books she found them full of queer
green pictures that made her laugh, they were so funny.

In a wardrobe were many green dresses, made of silk and satin and
velvet; and all of them fitted Dorothy exactly.

"Make yourself perfectly at home," said the green girl, "and if you
wish for anything ring the bell.  Oz will send for you tomorrow
morning."

She left Dorothy alone and went back to the others.  These she also led
to rooms, and each one of them found himself lodged in a very pleasant
part of the Palace.  Of course this politeness was wasted on the
Scarecrow; for when he found himself alone in his room he stood
stupidly in one spot, just within the doorway, to wait till morning.
It would not rest him to lie down, and he could not close his eyes; so
he remained all night staring at a little spider which was weaving its
web in a corner of the room, just as if it were not one of the most
wonderful rooms in the world.  The Tin Woodman lay down on his bed from
force of habit, for he remembered when he was made of flesh; but not
being able to sleep, he passed the night moving his joints up and down
to make sure they kept in good working order.  The Lion would have
preferred a bed of dried leaves in the forest, and did not like being
shut up in a room; but he had too much sense to let this worry him, so
he sprang upon the bed and rolled himself up like a cat and purred
himself asleep in a minute.

The next morning, after breakfast, the green maiden came to fetch
Dorothy, and she dressed her in one of the prettiest gowns, made of
green brocaded satin.  Dorothy put on a green silk apron and tied a
green ribbon around Toto's neck, and they started for the Throne Room
of the Great Oz.

First they came to a great hall in which were many ladies and gentlemen
of the court, all dressed in rich costumes.  These people had nothing
to do but talk to each other, but they always came to wait outside the
Throne Room every morning, although they were never permitted to see
Oz.  As Dorothy entered they looked at her curiously, and one of them
whispered:

"Are you really going to look upon the face of Oz the Terrible?"

"Of course," answered the girl, "if he will see me."

"Oh, he will see you," said the soldier who had taken her message to
the Wizard, "although he does not like to have people ask to see him.
Indeed, at first he was angry and said I should send you back where you
came from.  Then he asked me what you looked like, and when I mentioned
your silver shoes he was very much interested.  At last I told him
about the mark upon your forehead, and he decided he would admit you to
his presence."

Just then a bell rang, and the green girl said to Dorothy, "That is the
signal.  You must go into the Throne Room alone."

She opened a little door and Dorothy walked boldly through and found
herself in a wonderful place.  It was a big, round room with a high
arched roof, and the walls and ceiling and floor were covered with
large emeralds set closely together.  In the center of the roof was a
great light, as bright as the sun, which made the emeralds sparkle in a
wonderful manner.

But what interested Dorothy most was the big throne of green marble
that stood in the middle of the room.  It was shaped like a chair and
sparkled with gems, as did everything else.  In the center of the chair
was an enormous Head, without a body to support it or any arms or legs
whatever.  There was no hair upon this head, but it had eyes and a nose
and mouth, and was much bigger than the head of the biggest giant.

As Dorothy gazed upon this in wonder and fear, the eyes turned slowly
and looked at her sharply and steadily.  Then the mouth moved, and
Dorothy heard a voice say:

"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible.  Who are you, and why do you seek me?"

It was not such an awful voice as she had expected to come from the big
Head; so she took courage and answered:

"I am Dorothy, the Small and Meek.  I have come to you for help."

The eyes looked at her thoughtfully for a full minute.  Then said the
voice:

"Where did you get the silver shoes?"

"I got them from the Wicked Witch of the East, when my house fell on
her and killed her," she replied.

"Where did you get the mark upon your forehead?" continued the voice.

"That is where the Good Witch of the North kissed me when she bade me
good-bye and sent me to you," said the girl.

Again the eyes looked at her sharply, and they saw she was telling the
truth.  Then Oz asked, "What do you wish me to do?"

"Send me back to Kansas, where my Aunt Em and Uncle Henry are," she
answered earnestly.  "I don't like your country, although it is so
beautiful.  And I am sure Aunt Em will be dreadfully worried over my
being away so long."

The eyes winked three times, and then they turned up to the ceiling and
down to the floor and rolled around so queerly that they seemed to see
every part of the room.  And at last they looked at Dorothy again.

"Why should I do this for you?" asked Oz.

"Because you are strong and I am weak; because you are a Great Wizard
and I am only a little girl."

"But you were strong enough to kill the Wicked Witch of the East," said
Oz.

"That just happened," returned Dorothy simply; "I could not help it."

"Well," said the Head, "I will give you my answer.  You have no right
to expect me to send you back to Kansas unless you do something for me
in return.  In this country everyone must pay for everything he gets.
If you wish me to use my magic power to send you home again you must do
something for me first.  Help me and I will help you."

"What must I do?" asked the girl.

"Kill the Wicked Witch of the West," answered Oz.

"But I cannot!" exclaimed Dorothy, greatly surprised.

"You killed the Witch of the East and you wear the silver shoes, which
bear a powerful charm.  There is now but one Wicked Witch left in all
this land, and when you can tell me she is dead I will send you back to
Kansas--but not before."

The little girl began to weep, she was so much disappointed; and the
eyes winked again and looked upon her anxiously, as if the Great Oz
felt that she could help him if she would.

"I never killed anything, willingly," she sobbed.  "Even if I wanted
to, how could I kill the Wicked Witch?  If you, who are Great and
Terrible, cannot kill her yourself, how do you expect me to do it?"

"I do not know," said the Head; "but that is my answer, and until the
Wicked Witch dies you will not see your uncle and aunt again.  Remember
that the Witch is Wicked--tremendously Wicked--and ought to be killed.
Now go, and do not ask to see me again until you have done your task."

Sorrowfully Dorothy left the Throne Room and went back where the Lion
and the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were waiting to hear what Oz had
said to her.  "There is no hope for me," she said sadly, "for Oz will
not send me home until I have killed the Wicked Witch of the West; and
that I can never do."

Her friends were sorry, but could do nothing to help her; so Dorothy
went to her own room and lay down on the bed and cried herself to sleep.

The next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to the
Scarecrow and said:

"Come with me, for Oz has sent for you."

So the Scarecrow followed him and was admitted into the great Throne
Room, where he saw, sitting in the emerald throne, a most lovely Lady.
She was dressed in green silk gauze and wore upon her flowing green
locks a crown of jewels.  Growing from her shoulders were wings,
gorgeous in color and so light that they fluttered if the slightest
breath of air reached them.

When the Scarecrow had bowed, as prettily as his straw stuffing would
let him, before this beautiful creature, she looked upon him sweetly,
and said:

"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible.  Who are you, and why do you seek me?"

Now the Scarecrow, who had expected to see the great Head Dorothy had
told him of, was much astonished; but he answered her bravely.

"I am only a Scarecrow, stuffed with straw.  Therefore I have no
brains, and I come to you praying that you will put brains in my head
instead of straw, so that I may become as much a man as any other in
your dominions."

"Why should I do this for you?" asked the Lady.

"Because you are wise and powerful, and no one else can help me,"
answered the Scarecrow.

"I never grant favors without some return," said Oz; "but this much I
will promise.  If you will kill for me the Wicked Witch of the West, I
will bestow upon you a great many brains, and such good brains that you
will be the wisest man in all the Land of Oz."

"I thought you asked Dorothy to kill the Witch," said the Scarecrow, in
surprise.

"So I did.  I don't care who kills her.  But until she is dead I will
not grant your wish.  Now go, and do not seek me again until you have
earned the brains you so greatly desire."

The Scarecrow went sorrowfully back to his friends and told them what
Oz had said; and Dorothy was surprised to find that the Great Wizard
was not a Head, as she had seen him, but a lovely Lady.

"All the same," said the Scarecrow, "she needs a heart as much as the
Tin Woodman."

On the next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to the Tin
Woodman and said:

"Oz has sent for you.  Follow me."

So the Tin Woodman followed him and came to the great Throne Room.  He
did not know whether he would find Oz a lovely Lady or a Head, but he
hoped it would be the lovely Lady.  "For," he said to himself, "if it
is the head, I am sure I shall not be given a heart, since a head has
no heart of its own and therefore cannot feel for me.  But if it is the
lovely Lady I shall beg hard for a heart, for all ladies are themselves
said to be kindly hearted."

But when the Woodman entered the great Throne Room he saw neither the
Head nor the Lady, for Oz had taken the shape of a most terrible Beast.
It was nearly as big as an elephant, and the green throne seemed hardly
strong enough to hold its weight.  The Beast had a head like that of a
rhinoceros, only there were five eyes in its face.  There were five
long arms growing out of its body, and it also had five long, slim
legs.  Thick, woolly hair covered every part of it, and a more
dreadful-looking monster could not be imagined.  It was fortunate the
Tin Woodman had no heart at that moment, for it would have beat loud
and fast from terror.  But being only tin, the Woodman was not at all
afraid, although he was much disappointed.

"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible," spoke the Beast, in a voice that was
one great roar.  "Who are you, and why do you seek me?"

"I am a Woodman, and made of tin.  Therefore I have no heart, and
cannot love.  I pray you to give me a heart that I may be as other men
are."

"Why should I do this?" demanded the Beast.

"Because I ask it, and you alone can grant my request," answered the
Woodman.

Oz gave a low growl at this, but said, gruffly: "If you indeed desire a
heart, you must earn it."

"How?" asked the Woodman.

"Help Dorothy to kill the Wicked Witch of the West," replied the Beast.
"When the Witch is dead, come to me, and I will then give you the
biggest and kindest and most loving heart in all the Land of Oz."

So the Tin Woodman was forced to return sorrowfully to his friends and
tell them of the terrible Beast he had seen.  They all wondered greatly
at the many forms the Great Wizard could take upon himself, and the
Lion said:

"If he is a Beast when I go to see him, I shall roar my loudest, and so
frighten him that he will grant all I ask.  And if he is the lovely
Lady, I shall pretend to spring upon her, and so compel her to do my
bidding.  And if he is the great Head, he will be at my mercy; for I
will roll this head all about the room until he promises to give us
what we desire.  So be of good cheer, my friends, for all will yet be
well."

The next morning the soldier with the green whiskers led the Lion to
the great Throne Room and bade him enter the presence of Oz.

The Lion at once passed through the door, and glancing around saw, to
his surprise, that before the throne was a Ball of Fire, so fierce and
glowing he could scarcely bear to gaze upon it.  His first thought was
that Oz had by accident caught on fire and was burning up; but when he
tried to go nearer, the heat was so intense that it singed his
whiskers, and he crept back tremblingly to a spot nearer the door.

Then a low, quiet voice came from the Ball of Fire, and these were the
words it spoke:

"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible.  Who are you, and why do you seek me?"

And the Lion answered, "I am a Cowardly Lion, afraid of everything.  I
came to you to beg that you give me courage, so that in reality I may
become the King of Beasts, as men call me."

"Why should I give you courage?" demanded Oz.

"Because of all Wizards you are the greatest, and alone have power to
grant my request," answered the Lion.

The Ball of Fire burned fiercely for a time, and the voice said, "Bring
me proof that the Wicked Witch is dead, and that moment I will give you
courage.  But as long as the Witch lives, you must remain a coward."

The Lion was angry at this speech, but could say nothing in reply, and
while he stood silently gazing at the Ball of Fire it became so
furiously hot that he turned tail and rushed from the room.  He was
glad to find his friends waiting for him, and told them of his terrible
interview with the Wizard.

"What shall we do now?" asked Dorothy sadly.

"There is only one thing we can do," returned the Lion, "and that is to
go to the land of the Winkies, seek out the Wicked Witch, and destroy
her."

"But suppose we cannot?" said the girl.

"Then I shall never have courage," declared the Lion.

"And I shall never have brains," added the Scarecrow.

"And I shall never have a heart," spoke the Tin Woodman.

"And I shall never see Aunt Em and Uncle Henry," said Dorothy,
beginning to cry.

"Be careful!" cried the green girl.  "The tears will fall on your green
silk gown and spot it."

So Dorothy dried her eyes and said, "I suppose we must try it; but I am
sure I do not want to kill anybody, even to see Aunt Em again."

"I will go with you; but I'm too much of a coward to kill the Witch,"
said the Lion.

"I will go too," declared the Scarecrow; "but I shall not be of much
help to you, I am such a fool."

"I haven't the heart to harm even a Witch," remarked the Tin Woodman;
"but if you go I certainly shall go with you."

Therefore it was decided to start upon their journey the next morning,
and the Woodman sharpened his axe on a green grindstone and had all his
joints properly oiled.  The Scarecrow stuffed himself with fresh straw
and Dorothy put new paint on his eyes that he might see better.  The
green girl, who was very kind to them, filled Dorothy's basket with
good things to eat, and fastened a little bell around Toto's neck with
a green ribbon.

They went to bed quite early and slept soundly until daylight, when
they were awakened by the crowing of a green cock that lived in the
back yard of the Palace, and the cackling of a hen that had laid a
green egg.




12.  The Search for the Wicked Witch


The soldier with the green whiskers led them through the streets of the
Emerald City until they reached the room where the Guardian of the
Gates lived.  This officer unlocked their spectacles to put them back
in his great box, and then he politely opened the gate for our friends.

"Which road leads to the Wicked Witch of the West?" asked Dorothy.

"There is no road," answered the Guardian of the Gates.  "No one ever
wishes to go that way."

"How, then, are we to find her?" inquired the girl.

"That will be easy," replied the man, "for when she knows you are in
the country of the Winkies she will find you, and make you all her
slaves."

"Perhaps not," said the Scarecrow, "for we mean to destroy her."

"Oh, that is different," said the Guardian of the Gates.  "No one has
ever destroyed her before, so I naturally thought she would make slaves
of you, as she has of the rest.  But take care; for she is wicked and
fierce, and may not allow you to destroy her.  Keep to the West, where
the sun sets, and you cannot fail to find her."

They thanked him and bade him good-bye, and turned toward the West,
walking over fields of soft grass dotted here and there with daisies
and buttercups.  Dorothy still wore the pretty silk dress she had put
on in the palace, but now, to her surprise, she found it was no longer
green, but pure white.  The ribbon around Toto's neck had also lost its
green color and was as white as Dorothy's dress.

The Emerald City was soon left far behind.  As they advanced the ground
became rougher and hillier, for there were no farms nor houses in this
country of the West, and the ground was untilled.

In the afternoon the sun shone hot in their faces, for there were no
trees to offer them shade; so that before night Dorothy and Toto and
the Lion were tired, and lay down upon the grass and fell asleep, with
the Woodman and the Scarecrow keeping watch.

Now the Wicked Witch of the West had but one eye, yet that was as
powerful as a telescope, and could see everywhere.  So, as she sat in
the door of her castle, she happened to look around and saw Dorothy
lying asleep, with her friends all about her.  They were a long
distance off, but the Wicked Witch was angry to find them in her
country; so she blew upon a silver whistle that hung around her neck.

At once there came running to her from all directions a pack of great
wolves.  They had long legs and fierce eyes and sharp teeth.

"Go to those people," said the Witch, "and tear them to pieces."

"Are you not going to make them your slaves?" asked the leader of the
wolves.

"No," she answered, "one is of tin, and one of straw; one is a girl and
another a Lion.  None of them is fit to work, so you may tear them into
small pieces."

"Very well," said the wolf, and he dashed away at full speed, followed
by the others.

It was lucky the Scarecrow and the Woodman were wide awake and heard
the wolves coming.

"This is my fight," said the Woodman, "so get behind me and I will meet
them as they come."

He seized his axe, which he had made very sharp, and as the leader of
the wolves came on the Tin Woodman swung his arm and chopped the wolf's
head from its body, so that it immediately died.  As soon as he could
raise his axe another wolf came up, and he also fell under the sharp
edge of the Tin Woodman's weapon.  There were forty wolves, and forty
times a wolf was killed, so that at last they all lay dead in a heap
before the Woodman.

Then he put down his axe and sat beside the Scarecrow, who said, "It
was a good fight, friend."

They waited until Dorothy awoke the next morning.  The little girl was
quite frightened when she saw the great pile of shaggy wolves, but the
Tin Woodman told her all.  She thanked him for saving them and sat down
to breakfast, after which they started again upon their journey.

Now this same morning the Wicked Witch came to the door of her castle
and looked out with her one eye that could see far off.  She saw all
her wolves lying dead, and the strangers still traveling through her
country.  This made her angrier than before, and she blew her silver
whistle twice.

Straightway a great flock of wild crows came flying toward her, enough
to darken the sky.

And the Wicked Witch said to the King Crow, "Fly at once to the
strangers; peck out their eyes and tear them to pieces."

The wild crows flew in one great flock toward Dorothy and her
companions.  When the little girl saw them coming she was afraid.

But the Scarecrow said, "This is my battle, so lie down beside me and
you will not be harmed."

So they all lay upon the ground except the Scarecrow, and he stood up
and stretched out his arms.  And when the crows saw him they were
frightened, as these birds always are by scarecrows, and did not dare
to come any nearer.  But the King Crow said:

"It is only a stuffed man.  I will peck his eyes out."

The King Crow flew at the Scarecrow, who caught it by the head and
twisted its neck until it died.  And then another crow flew at him, and
the Scarecrow twisted its neck also.  There were forty crows, and forty
times the Scarecrow twisted a neck, until at last all were lying dead
beside him.  Then he called to his companions to rise, and again they
went upon their journey.

When the Wicked Witch looked out again and saw all her crows lying in a
heap, she got into a terrible rage, and blew three times upon her
silver whistle.

Forthwith there was heard a great buzzing in the air, and a swarm of
black bees came flying toward her.

"Go to the strangers and sting them to death!" commanded the Witch, and
the bees turned and flew rapidly until they came to where Dorothy and
her friends were walking.  But the Woodman had seen them coming, and
the Scarecrow had decided what to do.

"Take out my straw and scatter it over the little girl and the dog and
the Lion," he said to the Woodman, "and the bees cannot sting them."
This the Woodman did, and as Dorothy lay close beside the Lion and held
Toto in her arms, the straw covered them entirely.

The bees came and found no one but the Woodman to sting, so they flew
at him and broke off all their stings against the tin, without hurting
the Woodman at all.  And as bees cannot live when their stings are
broken that was the end of the black bees, and they lay scattered thick
about the Woodman, like little heaps of fine coal.

Then Dorothy and the Lion got up, and the girl helped the Tin Woodman
put the straw back into the Scarecrow again, until he was as good as
ever.  So they started upon their journey once more.

The Wicked Witch was so angry when she saw her black bees in little
heaps like fine coal that she stamped her foot and tore her hair and
gnashed her teeth.  And then she called a dozen of her slaves, who were
the Winkies, and gave them sharp spears, telling them to go to the
strangers and destroy them.

The Winkies were not a brave people, but they had to do as they were
told.  So they marched away until they came near to Dorothy.  Then the
Lion gave a great roar and sprang towards them, and the poor Winkies
were so frightened that they ran back as fast as they could.

When they returned to the castle the Wicked Witch beat them well with a
strap, and sent them back to their work, after which she sat down to
think what she should do next.  She could not understand how all her
plans to destroy these strangers had failed; but she was a powerful
Witch, as well as a wicked one, and she soon made up her mind how to
act.

There was, in her cupboard, a Golden Cap, with a circle of diamonds and
rubies running round it.  This Golden Cap had a charm.  Whoever owned
it could call three times upon the Winged Monkeys, who would obey any
order they were given.  But no person could command these strange
creatures more than three times.  Twice already the Wicked Witch had
used the charm of the Cap.  Once was when she had made the Winkies her
slaves, and set herself to rule over their country.  The Winged Monkeys
had helped her do this.  The second time was when she had fought
against the Great Oz himself, and driven him out of the land of the
West.  The Winged Monkeys had also helped her in doing this.  Only once
more could she use this Golden Cap, for which reason she did not like
to do so until all her other powers were exhausted.  But now that her
fierce wolves and her wild crows and her stinging bees were gone, and
her slaves had been scared away by the Cowardly Lion, she saw there was
only one way left to destroy Dorothy and her friends.

So the Wicked Witch took the Golden Cap from her cupboard and placed it
upon her head.  Then she stood upon her left foot and said slowly:

"Ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!"

Next she stood upon her right foot and said:

"Hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!"

After this she stood upon both feet and cried in a loud voice:

"Ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!"

Now the charm began to work.  The sky was darkened, and a low rumbling
sound was heard in the air.  There was a rushing of many wings, a great
chattering and laughing, and the sun came out of the dark sky to show
the Wicked Witch surrounded by a crowd of monkeys, each with a pair of
immense and powerful wings on his shoulders.

One, much bigger than the others, seemed to be their leader.  He flew
close to the Witch and said, "You have called us for the third and last
time.  What do you command?"

"Go to the strangers who are within my land and destroy them all except
the Lion," said the Wicked Witch.  "Bring that beast to me, for I have
a mind to harness him like a horse, and make him work."

"Your commands shall be obeyed," said the leader.  Then, with a great
deal of chattering and noise, the Winged Monkeys flew away to the place
where Dorothy and her friends were walking.

Some of the Monkeys seized the Tin Woodman and carried him through the
air until they were over a country thickly covered with sharp rocks.
Here they dropped the poor Woodman, who fell a great distance to the
rocks, where he lay so battered and dented that he could neither move
nor groan.

Others of the Monkeys caught the Scarecrow, and with their long fingers
pulled all of the straw out of his clothes and head.  They made his hat
and boots and clothes into a small bundle and threw it into the top
branches of a tall tree.

The remaining Monkeys threw pieces of stout rope around the Lion and
wound many coils about his body and head and legs, until he was unable
to bite or scratch or struggle in any way.  Then they lifted him up and
flew away with him to the Witch's castle, where he was placed in a
small yard with a high iron fence around it, so that he could not
escape.

But Dorothy they did not harm at all.  She stood, with Toto in her
arms, watching the sad fate of her comrades and thinking it would soon
be her turn.  The leader of the Winged Monkeys flew up to her, his
long, hairy arms stretched out and his ugly face grinning terribly; but
he saw the mark of the Good Witch's kiss upon her forehead and stopped
short, motioning the others not to touch her.

"We dare not harm this little girl," he said to them, "for she is
protected by the Power of Good, and that is greater than the Power of
Evil.  All we can do is to carry her to the castle of the Wicked Witch
and leave her there."

So, carefully and gently, they lifted Dorothy in their arms and carried
her swiftly through the air until they came to the castle, where they
set her down upon the front doorstep.  Then the leader said to the
Witch:

"We have obeyed you as far as we were able.  The Tin Woodman and the
Scarecrow are destroyed, and the Lion is tied up in your yard.  The
little girl we dare not harm, nor the dog she carries in her arms.
Your power over our band is now ended, and you will never see us again."

Then all the Winged Monkeys, with much laughing and chattering and
noise, flew into the air and were soon out of sight.

The Wicked Witch was both surprised and worried when she saw the mark
on Dorothy's forehead, for she knew well that neither the Winged
Monkeys nor she, herself, dare hurt the girl in any way.  She looked
down at Dorothy's feet, and seeing the Silver Shoes, began to tremble
with fear, for she knew what a powerful charm belonged to them.  At
first the Witch was tempted to run away from Dorothy; but she happened
to look into the child's eyes and saw how simple the soul behind them
was, and that the little girl did not know of the wonderful power the
Silver Shoes gave her.  So the Wicked Witch laughed to herself, and
thought, "I can still make her my slave, for she does not know how to
use her power." Then she said to Dorothy, harshly and severely:

"Come with me; and see that you mind everything I tell you, for if you
do not I will make an end of you, as I did of the Tin Woodman and the
Scarecrow."

Dorothy followed her through many of the beautiful rooms in her castle
until they came to the kitchen, where the Witch bade her clean the pots
and kettles and sweep the floor and keep the fire fed with wood.

Dorothy went to work meekly, with her mind made up to work as hard as
she could; for she was glad the Wicked Witch had decided not to kill
her.

With Dorothy hard at work, the Witch thought she would go into the
courtyard and harness the Cowardly Lion like a horse; it would amuse
her, she was sure, to make him draw her chariot whenever she wished to
go to drive.  But as she opened the gate the Lion gave a loud roar and
bounded at her so fiercely that the Witch was afraid, and ran out and
shut the gate again.

"If I cannot harness you," said the Witch to the Lion, speaking through
the bars of the gate, "I can starve you.  You shall have nothing to eat
until you do as I wish."

So after that she took no food to the imprisoned Lion; but every day
she came to the gate at noon and asked, "Are you ready to be harnessed
like a horse?"

And the Lion would answer, "No.  If you come in this yard, I will bite
you."

The reason the Lion did not have to do as the Witch wished was that
every night, while the woman was asleep, Dorothy carried him food from
the cupboard.  After he had eaten he would lie down on his bed of
straw, and Dorothy would lie beside him and put her head on his soft,
shaggy mane, while they talked of their troubles and tried to plan some
way to escape.  But they could find no way to get out of the castle,
for it was constantly guarded by the yellow Winkies, who were the
slaves of the Wicked Witch and too afraid of her not to do as she told
them.

The girl had to work hard during the day, and often the Witch
threatened to beat her with the same old umbrella she always carried in
her hand.  But, in truth, she did not dare to strike Dorothy, because
of the mark upon her forehead.  The child did not know this, and was
full of fear for herself and Toto.  Once the Witch struck Toto a blow
with her umbrella and the brave little dog flew at her and bit her leg
in return.  The Witch did not bleed where she was bitten, for she was
so wicked that the blood in her had dried up many years before.

Dorothy's life became very sad as she grew to understand that it would
be harder than ever to get back to Kansas and Aunt Em again.  Sometimes
she would cry bitterly for hours, with Toto sitting at her feet and
looking into her face, whining dismally to show how sorry he was for
his little mistress.  Toto did not really care whether he was in Kansas
or the Land of Oz so long as Dorothy was with him; but he knew the
little girl was unhappy, and that made him unhappy too.

Now the Wicked Witch had a great longing to have for her own the Silver
Shoes which the girl always wore.  Her bees and her crows and her
wolves were lying in heaps and drying up, and she had used up all the
power of the Golden Cap; but if she could only get hold of the Silver
Shoes, they would give her more power than all the other things she had
lost.  She watched Dorothy carefully, to see if she ever took off her
shoes, thinking she might steal them.  But the child was so proud of
her pretty shoes that she never took them off except at night and when
she took her bath.  The Witch was too much afraid of the dark to dare
go in Dorothy's room at night to take the shoes, and her dread of water
was greater than her fear of the dark, so she never came near when
Dorothy was bathing.  Indeed, the old Witch never touched water, nor
ever let water touch her in any way.

But the wicked creature was very cunning, and she finally thought of a
trick that would give her what she wanted.  She placed a bar of iron in
the middle of the kitchen floor, and then by her magic arts made the
iron invisible to human eyes.  So that when Dorothy walked across the
floor she stumbled over the bar, not being able to see it, and fell at
full length.  She was not much hurt, but in her fall one of the Silver
Shoes came off; and before she could reach it, the Witch had snatched
it away and put it on her own skinny foot.

The wicked woman was greatly pleased with the success of her trick, for
as long as she had one of the shoes she owned half the power of their
charm, and Dorothy could not use it against her, even had she known how
to do so.

The little girl, seeing she had lost one of her pretty shoes, grew
angry, and said to the Witch, "Give me back my shoe!"

"I will not," retorted the Witch, "for it is now my shoe, and not
yours."

"You are a wicked creature!" cried Dorothy.  "You have no right to take
my shoe from me."

"I shall keep it, just the same," said the Witch, laughing at her, "and
someday I shall get the other one from you, too."

This made Dorothy so very angry that she picked up the bucket of water
that stood near and dashed it over the Witch, wetting her from head to
foot.

Instantly the wicked woman gave a loud cry of fear, and then, as
Dorothy looked at her in wonder, the Witch began to shrink and fall
away.

"See what you have done!" she screamed.  "In a minute I shall melt
away."

"I'm very sorry, indeed," said Dorothy, who was truly frightened to see
the Witch actually melting away like brown sugar before her very eyes.

"Didn't you know water would be the end of me?" asked the Witch, in a
wailing, despairing voice.

"Of course not," answered Dorothy.  "How should I?"

"Well, in a few minutes I shall be all melted, and you will have the
castle to yourself.  I have been wicked in my day, but I never thought
a little girl like you would ever be able to melt me and end my wicked
deeds.  Look out--here I go!"

With these words the Witch fell down in a brown, melted, shapeless mass
and began to spread over the clean boards of the kitchen floor.  Seeing
that she had really melted away to nothing, Dorothy drew another bucket
of water and threw it over the mess.  She then swept it all out the
door.  After picking out the silver shoe, which was all that was left
of the old woman, she cleaned and dried it with a cloth, and put it on
her foot again.  Then, being at last free to do as she chose, she ran
out to the courtyard to tell the Lion that the Wicked Witch of the West
had come to an end, and that they were no longer prisoners in a strange
land.




13.  The Rescue


The Cowardly Lion was much pleased to hear that the Wicked Witch had
been melted by a bucket of water, and Dorothy at once unlocked the gate
of his prison and set him free.  They went in together to the castle,
where Dorothy's first act was to call all the Winkies together and tell
them that they were no longer slaves.

There was great rejoicing among the yellow Winkies, for they had been
made to work hard during many years for the Wicked Witch, who had
always treated them with great cruelty.  They kept this day as a
holiday, then and ever after, and spent the time in feasting and
dancing.

"If our friends, the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, were only with us,"
said the Lion, "I should be quite happy."

"Don't you suppose we could rescue them?" asked the girl anxiously.

"We can try," answered the Lion.

So they called the yellow Winkies and asked them if they would help to
rescue their friends, and the Winkies said that they would be delighted
to do all in their power for Dorothy, who had set them free from
bondage.  So she chose a number of the Winkies who looked as if they
knew the most, and they all started away.  They traveled that day and
part of the next until they came to the rocky plain where the Tin
Woodman lay, all battered and bent.  His axe was near him, but the
blade was rusted and the handle broken off short.

The Winkies lifted him tenderly in their arms, and carried him back to
the Yellow Castle again, Dorothy shedding a few tears by the way at the
sad plight of her old friend, and the Lion looking sober and sorry.
When they reached the castle Dorothy said to the Winkies:

"Are any of your people tinsmiths?"

"Oh, yes.  Some of us are very good tinsmiths," they told her.

"Then bring them to me," she said.  And when the tinsmiths came,
bringing with them all their tools in baskets, she inquired, "Can you
straighten out those dents in the Tin Woodman, and bend him back into
shape again, and solder him together where he is broken?"

The tinsmiths looked the Woodman over carefully and then answered that
they thought they could mend him so he would be as good as ever.  So
they set to work in one of the big yellow rooms of the castle and
worked for three days and four nights, hammering and twisting and
bending and soldering and polishing and pounding at the legs and body
and head of the Tin Woodman, until at last he was straightened out into
his old form, and his joints worked as well as ever.  To be sure, there
were several patches on him, but the tinsmiths did a good job, and as
the Woodman was not a vain man he did not mind the patches at all.

When, at last, he walked into Dorothy's room and thanked her for
rescuing him, he was so pleased that he wept tears of joy, and Dorothy
had to wipe every tear carefully from his face with her apron, so his
joints would not be rusted.  At the same time her own tears fell thick
and fast at the joy of meeting her old friend again, and these tears
did not need to be wiped away.  As for the Lion, he wiped his eyes so
often with the tip of his tail that it became quite wet, and he was
obliged to go out into the courtyard and hold it in the sun till it
dried.

"If we only had the Scarecrow with us again," said the Tin Woodman,
when Dorothy had finished telling him everything that had happened, "I
should be quite happy."

"We must try to find him," said the girl.

So she called the Winkies to help her, and they walked all that day and
part of the next until they came to the tall tree in the branches of
which the Winged Monkeys had tossed the Scarecrow's clothes.

It was a very tall tree, and the trunk was so smooth that no one could
climb it; but the Woodman said at once, "I'll chop it down, and then we
can get the Scarecrow's clothes."

Now while the tinsmiths had been at work mending the Woodman himself,
another of the Winkies, who was a goldsmith, had made an axe-handle of
solid gold and fitted it to the Woodman's axe, instead of the old
broken handle.  Others polished the blade until all the rust was
removed and it glistened like burnished silver.

As soon as he had spoken, the Tin Woodman began to chop, and in a short
time the tree fell over with a crash, whereupon the Scarecrow's clothes
fell out of the branches and rolled off on the ground.

Dorothy picked them up and had the Winkies carry them back to the
castle, where they were stuffed with nice, clean straw; and behold!
here was the Scarecrow, as good as ever, thanking them over and over
again for saving him.

Now that they were reunited, Dorothy and her friends spent a few happy
days at the Yellow Castle, where they found everything they needed to
make them comfortable.

But one day the girl thought of Aunt Em, and said, "We must go back to
Oz, and claim his promise."

"Yes," said the Woodman, "at last I shall get my heart."

"And I shall get my brains," added the Scarecrow joyfully.

"And I shall get my courage," said the Lion thoughtfully.

"And I shall get back to Kansas," cried Dorothy, clapping her hands.
"Oh, let us start for the Emerald City tomorrow!"

This they decided to do.  The next day they called the Winkies together
and bade them good-bye.  The Winkies were sorry to have them go, and
they had grown so fond of the Tin Woodman that they begged him to stay
and rule over them and the Yellow Land of the West.  Finding they were
determined to go, the Winkies gave Toto and the Lion each a golden
collar; and to Dorothy they presented a beautiful bracelet studded with
diamonds; and to the Scarecrow they gave a gold-headed walking stick,
to keep him from stumbling; and to the Tin Woodman they offered a
silver oil-can, inlaid with gold and set with precious jewels.

Every one of the travelers made the Winkies a pretty speech in return,
and all shook hands with them until their arms ached.

Dorothy went to the Witch's cupboard to fill her basket with food for
the journey, and there she saw the Golden Cap.  She tried it on her own
head and found that it fitted her exactly.  She did not know anything
about the charm of the Golden Cap, but she saw that it was pretty, so
she made up her mind to wear it and carry her sunbonnet in the basket.

Then, being prepared for the journey, they all started for the Emerald
City; and the Winkies gave them three cheers and many good wishes to
carry with them.




14.  The Winged Monkeys


You will remember there was no road--not even a pathway--between the
castle of the Wicked Witch and the Emerald City.  When the four
travelers went in search of the Witch she had seen them coming, and so
sent the Winged Monkeys to bring them to her.  It was much harder to
find their way back through the big fields of buttercups and yellow
daisies than it was being carried.  They knew, of course, they must go
straight east, toward the rising sun; and they started off in the right
way.  But at noon, when the sun was over their heads, they did not know
which was east and which was west, and that was the reason they were
lost in the great fields.  They kept on walking, however, and at night
the moon came out and shone brightly.  So they lay down among the sweet
smelling yellow flowers and slept soundly until morning--all but the
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman.

The next morning the sun was behind a cloud, but they started on, as if
they were quite sure which way they were going.

"If we walk far enough," said Dorothy, "I am sure we shall sometime
come to some place."

But day by day passed away, and they still saw nothing before them but
the scarlet fields.  The Scarecrow began to grumble a bit.

"We have surely lost our way," he said, "and unless we find it again in
time to reach the Emerald City, I shall never get my brains."

"Nor I my heart," declared the Tin Woodman.  "It seems to me I can
scarcely wait till I get to Oz, and you must admit this is a very long
journey."

"You see," said the Cowardly Lion, with a whimper, "I haven't the
courage to keep tramping forever, without getting anywhere at all."

Then Dorothy lost heart.  She sat down on the grass and looked at her
companions, and they sat down and looked at her, and Toto found that
for the first time in his life he was too tired to chase a butterfly
that flew past his head.  So he put out his tongue and panted and
looked at Dorothy as if to ask what they should do next.

"Suppose we call the field mice," she suggested.  "They could probably
tell us the way to the Emerald City."

"To be sure they could," cried the Scarecrow.  "Why didn't we think of
that before?"

Dorothy blew the little whistle she had always carried about her neck
since the Queen of the Mice had given it to her.  In a few minutes they
heard the pattering of tiny feet, and many of the small gray mice came
running up to her.  Among them was the Queen herself, who asked, in her
squeaky little voice:

"What can I do for my friends?"

"We have lost our way," said Dorothy.  "Can you tell us where the
Emerald City is?"

"Certainly," answered the Queen; "but it is a great way off, for you
have had it at your backs all this time."  Then she noticed Dorothy's
Golden Cap, and said, "Why don't you use the charm of the Cap, and call
the Winged Monkeys to you?  They will carry you to the City of Oz in
less than an hour."

"I didn't know there was a charm," answered Dorothy, in surprise.
"What is it?"

"It is written inside the Golden Cap," replied the Queen of the Mice.
"But if you are going to call the Winged Monkeys we must run away, for
they are full of mischief and think it great fun to plague us."

"Won't they hurt me?" asked the girl anxiously.

"Oh, no.  They must obey the wearer of the Cap.  Good-bye!" And she
scampered out of sight, with all the mice hurrying after her.

Dorothy looked inside the Golden Cap and saw some words written upon
the lining.  These, she thought, must be the charm, so she read the
directions carefully and put the Cap upon her head.

"Ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!" she said, standing on her left foot.

"What did you say?" asked the Scarecrow, who did not know what she was
doing.

"Hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!"  Dorothy went on, standing this time on her
right foot.

"Hello!" replied the Tin Woodman calmly.

"Ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!" said Dorothy, who was now standing on both feet.
This ended the saying of the charm, and they heard a great chattering
and flapping of wings, as the band of Winged Monkeys flew up to them.

The King bowed low before Dorothy, and asked, "What is your command?"

"We wish to go to the Emerald City," said the child, "and we have lost
our way."

"We will carry you," replied the King, and no sooner had he spoken than
two of the Monkeys caught Dorothy in their arms and flew away with her.
Others took the Scarecrow and the Woodman and the Lion, and one little
Monkey seized Toto and flew after them, although the dog tried hard to
bite him.

The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were rather frightened at first, for
they remembered how badly the Winged Monkeys had treated them before;
but they saw that no harm was intended, so they rode through the air
quite cheerfully, and had a fine time looking at the pretty gardens and
woods far below them.

Dorothy found herself riding easily between two of the biggest Monkeys,
one of them the King himself.  They had made a chair of their hands and
were careful not to hurt her.

"Why do you have to obey the charm of the Golden Cap?" she asked.

"That is a long story," answered the King, with a winged laugh; "but as
we have a long journey before us, I will pass the time by telling you
about it, if you wish."

"I shall be glad to hear it," she replied.

"Once," began the leader, "we were a free people, living happily in the
great forest, flying from tree to tree, eating nuts and fruit, and
doing just as we pleased without calling anybody master.  Perhaps some
of us were rather too full of mischief at times, flying down to pull
the tails of the animals that had no wings, chasing birds, and throwing
nuts at the people who walked in the forest.  But we were careless and
happy and full of fun, and enjoyed every minute of the day.  This was
many years ago, long before Oz came out of the clouds to rule over this
land.

"There lived here then, away at the North, a beautiful princess, who
was also a powerful sorceress.  All her magic was used to help the
people, and she was never known to hurt anyone who was good.  Her name
was Gayelette, and she lived in a handsome palace built from great
blocks of ruby.  Everyone loved her, but her greatest sorrow was that
she could find no one to love in return, since all the men were much
too stupid and ugly to mate with one so beautiful and wise.  At last,
however, she found a boy who was handsome and manly and wise beyond his
years.  Gayelette made up her mind that when he grew to be a man she
would make him her husband, so she took him to her ruby palace and used
all her magic powers to make him as strong and good and lovely as any
woman could wish.  When he grew to manhood, Quelala, as he was called,
was said to be the best and wisest man in all the land, while his manly
beauty was so great that Gayelette loved him dearly, and hastened to
make everything ready for the wedding.

"My grandfather was at that time the King of the Winged Monkeys which
lived in the forest near Gayelette's palace, and the old fellow loved a
joke better than a good dinner.  One day, just before the wedding, my
grandfather was flying out with his band when he saw Quelala walking
beside the river.  He was dressed in a rich costume of pink silk and
purple velvet, and my grandfather thought he would see what he could
do.  At his word the band flew down and seized Quelala, carried him in
their arms until they were over the middle of the river, and then
dropped him into the water.

"'Swim out, my fine fellow,' cried my grandfather, 'and see if the
water has spotted your clothes.'  Quelala was much too wise not to
swim, and he was not in the least spoiled by all his good fortune.  He
laughed, when he came to the top of the water, and swam in to shore.
But when Gayelette came running out to him she found his silks and
velvet all ruined by the river.

"The princess was angry, and she knew, of course, who did it.  She had
all the Winged Monkeys brought before her, and she said at first that
their wings should be tied and they should be treated as they had
treated Quelala, and dropped in the river.  But my grandfather pleaded
hard, for he knew the Monkeys would drown in the river with their wings
tied, and Quelala said a kind word for them also; so that Gayelette
finally spared them, on condition that the Winged Monkeys should ever
after do three times the bidding of the owner of the Golden Cap.  This
Cap had been made for a wedding present to Quelala, and it is said to
have cost the princess half her kingdom.  Of course my grandfather and
all the other Monkeys at once agreed to the condition, and that is how
it happens that we are three times the slaves of the owner of the
Golden Cap, whosoever he may be."

"And what became of them?" asked Dorothy, who had been greatly
interested in the story.

"Quelala being the first owner of the Golden Cap," replied the Monkey,
"he was the first to lay his wishes upon us.  As his bride could not
bear the sight of us, he called us all to him in the forest after he
had married her and ordered us always to keep where she could never
again set eyes on a Winged Monkey, which we were glad to do, for we
were all afraid of her.

"This was all we ever had to do until the Golden Cap fell into the
hands of the Wicked Witch of the West, who made us enslave the Winkies,
and afterward drive Oz himself out of the Land of the West.  Now the
Golden Cap is yours, and three times you have the right to lay your
wishes upon us."

As the Monkey King finished his story Dorothy looked down and saw the
green, shining walls of the Emerald City before them.  She wondered at
the rapid flight of the Monkeys, but was glad the journey was over.
The strange creatures set the travelers down carefully before the gate
of the City, the King bowed low to Dorothy, and then flew swiftly away,
followed by all his band.

"That was a good ride," said the little girl.

"Yes, and a quick way out of our troubles," replied the Lion.  "How
lucky it was you brought away that wonderful Cap!"




  15.  The Discovery of Oz, the Terrible


The four travelers walked up to the great gate of Emerald City and rang
the bell.  After ringing several times, it was opened by the same
Guardian of the Gates they had met before.

"What! are you back again?" he asked, in surprise.

"Do you not see us?" answered the Scarecrow.

"But I thought you had gone to visit the Wicked Witch of the West."

"We did visit her," said the Scarecrow.

"And she let you go again?" asked the man, in wonder.

"She could not help it, for she is melted," explained the Scarecrow.

"Melted!  Well, that is good news, indeed," said the man.  "Who melted
her?"

"It was Dorothy," said the Lion gravely.

"Good gracious!" exclaimed the man, and he bowed very low indeed before
her.

Then he led them into his little room and locked the spectacles from
the great box on all their eyes, just as he had done before.  Afterward
they passed on through the gate into the Emerald City.  When the people
heard from the Guardian of the Gates that Dorothy had melted the Wicked
Witch of the West, they all gathered around the travelers and followed
them in a great crowd to the Palace of Oz.

The soldier with the green whiskers was still on guard before the door,
but he let them in at once, and they were again met by the beautiful
green girl, who showed each of them to their old rooms at once, so they
might rest until the Great Oz was ready to receive them.

The soldier had the news carried straight to Oz that Dorothy and the
other travelers had come back again, after destroying the Wicked Witch;
but Oz made no reply.  They thought the Great Wizard would send for
them at once, but he did not.  They had no word from him the next day,
nor the next, nor the next.  The waiting was tiresome and wearing, and
at last they grew vexed that Oz should treat them in so poor a fashion,
after sending them to undergo hardships and slavery.  So the Scarecrow
at last asked the green girl to take another message to Oz, saying if
he did not let them in to see him at once they would call the Winged
Monkeys to help them, and find out whether he kept his promises or not.
When the Wizard was given this message he was so frightened that he
sent word for them to come to the Throne Room at four minutes after
nine o'clock the next morning.  He had once met the Winged Monkeys in
the Land of the West, and he did not wish to meet them again.

The four travelers passed a sleepless night, each thinking of the gift
Oz had promised to bestow on him.  Dorothy fell asleep only once, and
then she dreamed she was in Kansas, where Aunt Em was telling her how
glad she was to have her little girl at home again.

Promptly at nine o'clock the next morning the green-whiskered soldier
came to them, and four minutes later they all went into the Throne Room
of the Great Oz.

Of course each one of them expected to see the Wizard in the shape he
had taken before, and all were greatly surprised when they looked about
and saw no one at all in the room.  They kept close to the door and
closer to one another, for the stillness of the empty room was more
dreadful than any of the forms they had seen Oz take.

Presently they heard a solemn Voice, that seemed to come from somewhere
near the top of the great dome, and it said:

"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible.  Why do you seek me?"

They looked again in every part of the room, and then, seeing no one,
Dorothy asked, "Where are you?"

"I am everywhere," answered the Voice, "but to the eyes of common
mortals I am invisible.  I will now seat myself upon my throne, that
you may converse with me."  Indeed, the Voice seemed just then to come
straight from the throne itself; so they walked toward it and stood in
a row while Dorothy said:

"We have come to claim our promise, O Oz."

"What promise?" asked Oz.

"You promised to send me back to Kansas when the Wicked Witch was
destroyed," said the girl.

"And you promised to give me brains," said the Scarecrow.

"And you promised to give me a heart," said the Tin Woodman.

"And you promised to give me courage," said the Cowardly Lion.

"Is the Wicked Witch really destroyed?" asked the Voice, and Dorothy
thought it trembled a little.

"Yes," she answered, "I melted her with a bucket of water."

"Dear me," said the Voice, "how sudden!  Well, come to me tomorrow, for
I must have time to think it over."

"You've had plenty of time already," said the Tin Woodman angrily.

"We shan't wait a day longer," said the Scarecrow.

"You must keep your promises to us!" exclaimed Dorothy.

The Lion thought it might be as well to frighten the Wizard, so he gave
a large, loud roar, which was so fierce and dreadful that Toto jumped
away from him in alarm and tipped over the screen that stood in a
corner.  As it fell with a crash they looked that way, and the next
moment all of them were filled with wonder.  For they saw, standing in
just the spot the screen had hidden, a little old man, with a bald head
and a wrinkled face, who seemed to be as much surprised as they were.
The Tin Woodman, raising his axe, rushed toward the little man and
cried out, "Who are you?"

"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible," said the little man, in a trembling
voice.  "But don't strike me--please don't--and I'll do anything you
want me to."

Our friends looked at him in surprise and dismay.

"I thought Oz was a great Head," said Dorothy.

"And I thought Oz was a lovely Lady," said the Scarecrow.

"And I thought Oz was a terrible Beast," said the Tin Woodman.

"And I thought Oz was a Ball of Fire," exclaimed the Lion.

"No, you are all wrong," said the little man meekly.  "I have been
making believe."

"Making believe!" cried Dorothy.  "Are you not a Great Wizard?"

"Hush, my dear," he said.  "Don't speak so loud, or you will be
overheard--and I should be ruined.  I'm supposed to be a Great Wizard."

"And aren't you?" she asked.

"Not a bit of it, my dear; I'm just a common man."

"You're more than that," said the Scarecrow, in a grieved tone; "you're
a humbug."

"Exactly so!" declared the little man, rubbing his hands together as if
it pleased him.  "I am a humbug."

"But this is terrible," said the Tin Woodman.  "How shall I ever get my
heart?"

"Or I my courage?" asked the Lion.

"Or I my brains?" wailed the Scarecrow, wiping the tears from his eyes
with his coat sleeve.

"My dear friends," said Oz, "I pray you not to speak of these little
things.  Think of me, and the terrible trouble I'm in at being found
out."

"Doesn't anyone else know you're a humbug?" asked Dorothy.

"No one knows it but you four--and myself," replied Oz.  "I have fooled
everyone so long that I thought I should never be found out.  It was a
great mistake my ever letting you into the Throne Room.  Usually I will
not see even my subjects, and so they believe I am something terrible."

"But, I don't understand," said Dorothy, in bewilderment.  "How was it
that you appeared to me as a great Head?"

"That was one of my tricks," answered Oz.  "Step this way, please, and
I will tell you all about it."

He led the way to a small chamber in the rear of the Throne Room, and
they all followed him.  He pointed to one corner, in which lay the
great Head, made out of many thicknesses of paper, and with a carefully
painted face.

"This I hung from the ceiling by a wire," said Oz.  "I stood behind the
screen and pulled a thread, to make the eyes move and the mouth open."

"But how about the voice?" she inquired.

"Oh, I am a ventriloquist," said the little man.  "I can throw the
sound of my voice wherever I wish, so that you thought it was coming
out of the Head.  Here are the other things I used to deceive you."  He
showed the Scarecrow the dress and the mask he had worn when he seemed
to be the lovely Lady.  And the Tin Woodman saw that his terrible Beast
was nothing but a lot of skins, sewn together, with slats to keep their
sides out.  As for the Ball of Fire, the false Wizard had hung that
also from the ceiling.  It was really a ball of cotton, but when oil
was poured upon it the ball burned fiercely.

"Really," said the Scarecrow, "you ought to be ashamed of yourself for
being such a humbug."

"I am--I certainly am," answered the little man sorrowfully; "but it
was the only thing I could do.  Sit down, please, there are plenty of
chairs; and I will tell you my story."

So they sat down and listened while he told the following tale.

"I was born in Omaha--"

"Why, that isn't very far from Kansas!" cried Dorothy.

"No, but it's farther from here," he said, shaking his head at her
sadly.  "When I grew up I became a ventriloquist, and at that I was
very well trained by a great master.  I can imitate any kind of a bird
or beast."  Here he mewed so like a kitten that Toto pricked up his
ears and looked everywhere to see where she was.  "After a time,"
continued Oz, "I tired of that, and became a balloonist."

"What is that?" asked Dorothy.

"A man who goes up in a balloon on circus day, so as to draw a crowd of
people together and get them to pay to see the circus," he explained.

"Oh," she said, "I know."

"Well, one day I went up in a balloon and the ropes got twisted, so
that I couldn't come down again.  It went way up above the clouds, so
far that a current of air struck it and carried it many, many miles
away.  For a day and a night I traveled through the air, and on the
morning of the second day I awoke and found the balloon floating over a
strange and beautiful country.

"It came down gradually, and I was not hurt a bit.  But I found myself
in the midst of a strange people, who, seeing me come from the clouds,
thought I was a great Wizard.  Of course I let them think so, because
they were afraid of me, and promised to do anything I wished them to.

"Just to amuse myself, and keep the good people busy, I ordered them to
build this City, and my Palace; and they did it all willingly and well.
Then I thought, as the country was so green and beautiful, I would call
it the Emerald City; and to make the name fit better I put green
spectacles on all the people, so that everything they saw was green."

"But isn't everything here green?" asked Dorothy.

"No more than in any other city," replied Oz; "but when you wear green
spectacles, why of course everything you see looks green to you.  The
Emerald City was built a great many years ago, for I was a young man
when the balloon brought me here, and I am a very old man now.  But my
people have worn green glasses on their eyes so long that most of them
think it really is an Emerald City, and it certainly is a beautiful
place, abounding in jewels and precious metals, and every good thing
that is needed to make one happy.  I have been good to the people, and
they like me; but ever since this Palace was built, I have shut myself
up and would not see any of them.

"One of my greatest fears was the Witches, for while I had no magical
powers at all I soon found out that the Witches were really able to do
wonderful things.  There were four of them in this country, and they
ruled the people who live in the North and South and East and West.
Fortunately, the Witches of the North and South were good, and I knew
they would do me no harm; but the Witches of the East and West were
terribly wicked, and had they not thought I was more powerful than they
themselves, they would surely have destroyed me.  As it was, I lived in
deadly fear of them for many years; so you can imagine how pleased I
was when I heard your house had fallen on the Wicked Witch of the East.
When you came to me, I was willing to promise anything if you would
only do away with the other Witch; but, now that you have melted her, I
am ashamed to say that I cannot keep my promises."

"I think you are a very bad man," said Dorothy.

"Oh, no, my dear; I'm really a very good man, but I'm a very bad
Wizard, I must admit."

"Can't you give me brains?" asked the Scarecrow.

"You don't need them.  You are learning something every day.  A baby
has brains, but it doesn't know much.  Experience is the only thing
that brings knowledge, and the longer you are on earth the more
experience you are sure to get."

"That may all be true," said the Scarecrow, "but I shall be very
unhappy unless you give me brains."

The false Wizard looked at him carefully.

"Well," he said with a sigh, "I'm not much of a magician, as I said;
but if you will come to me tomorrow morning, I will stuff your head
with brains.  I cannot tell you how to use them, however; you must find
that out for yourself."

"Oh, thank you--thank you!" cried the Scarecrow.  "I'll find a way to
use them, never fear!"

"But how about my courage?" asked the Lion anxiously.

"You have plenty of courage, I am sure," answered Oz.  "All you need is
confidence in yourself.  There is no living thing that is not afraid
when it faces danger.  The True courage is in facing danger when you
are afraid, and that kind of courage you have in plenty."

"Perhaps I have, but I'm scared just the same," said the Lion.  "I
shall really be very unhappy unless you give me the sort of courage
that makes one forget he is afraid."

"Very well, I will give you that sort of courage tomorrow," replied Oz.

"How about my heart?" asked the Tin Woodman.

"Why, as for that," answered Oz, "I think you are wrong to want a
heart.  It makes most people unhappy.  If you only knew it, you are in
luck not to have a heart."

"That must be a matter of opinion," said the Tin Woodman.  "For my
part, I will bear all the unhappiness without a murmur, if you will
give me the heart."

"Very well," answered Oz meekly.  "Come to me tomorrow and you shall
have a heart.  I have played Wizard for so many years that I may as
well continue the part a little longer."

"And now," said Dorothy, "how am I to get back to Kansas?"

"We shall have to think about that," replied the little man.  "Give me
two or three days to consider the matter and I'll try to find a way to
carry you over the desert.  In the meantime you shall all be treated as
my guests, and while you live in the Palace my people will wait upon
you and obey your slightest wish.  There is only one thing I ask in
return for my help--such as it is.  You must keep my secret and tell no
one I am a humbug."

They agreed to say nothing of what they had learned, and went back to
their rooms in high spirits.  Even Dorothy had hope that "The Great and
Terrible Humbug," as she called him, would find a way to send her back
to Kansas, and if he did she was willing to forgive him everything.




  16.  The Magic Art of the Great Humbug


Next morning the Scarecrow said to his friends:

"Congratulate me.  I am going to Oz to get my brains at last.  When I
return I shall be as other men are."

"I have always liked you as you were," said Dorothy simply.

"It is kind of you to like a Scarecrow," he replied.  "But surely you
will think more of me when you hear the splendid thoughts my new brain
is going to turn out."  Then he said good-bye to them all in a cheerful
voice and went to the Throne Room, where he rapped upon the door.

"Come in," said Oz.

The Scarecrow went in and found the little man sitting down by the
window, engaged in deep thought.

"I have come for my brains," remarked the Scarecrow, a little uneasily.

"Oh, yes; sit down in that chair, please," replied Oz.  "You must
excuse me for taking your head off, but I shall have to do it in order
to put your brains in their proper place."

"That's all right," said the Scarecrow.  "You are quite welcome to take
my head off, as long as it will be a better one when you put it on
again."

So the Wizard unfastened his head and emptied out the straw.  Then he
entered the back room and took up a measure of bran, which he mixed
with a great many pins and needles.  Having shaken them together
thoroughly, he filled the top of the Scarecrow's head with the mixture
and stuffed the rest of the space with straw, to hold it in place.

When he had fastened the Scarecrow's head on his body again he said to
him, "Hereafter you will be a great man, for I have given you a lot of
bran-new brains."

The Scarecrow was both pleased and proud at the fulfillment of his
greatest wish, and having thanked Oz warmly he went back to his friends.

Dorothy looked at him curiously.  His head was quite bulged out at the
top with brains.

"How do you feel?" she asked.

"I feel wise indeed," he answered earnestly.  "When I get used to my
brains I shall know everything."

"Why are those needles and pins sticking out of your head?" asked the
Tin Woodman.

"That is proof that he is sharp," remarked the Lion.

"Well, I must go to Oz and get my heart," said the Woodman.  So he
walked to the Throne Room and knocked at the door.

"Come in," called Oz, and the Woodman entered and said, "I have come
for my heart."

"Very well," answered the little man.  "But I shall have to cut a hole
in your breast, so I can put your heart in the right place.  I hope it
won't hurt you."

"Oh, no," answered the Woodman.  "I shall not feel it at all."

So Oz brought a pair of tinsmith's shears and cut a small, square hole
in the left side of the Tin Woodman's breast.  Then, going to a chest
of drawers, he took out a pretty heart, made entirely of silk and
stuffed with sawdust.

"Isn't it a beauty?" he asked.

"It is, indeed!" replied the Woodman, who was greatly pleased.  "But is
it a kind heart?"

"Oh, very!" answered Oz.  He put the heart in the Woodman's breast and
then replaced the square of tin, soldering it neatly together where it
had been cut.

"There," said he; "now you have a heart that any man might be proud of.
I'm sorry I had to put a patch on your breast, but it really couldn't
be helped."

"Never mind the patch," exclaimed the happy Woodman.  "I am very
grateful to you, and shall never forget your kindness."

"Don't speak of it," replied Oz.

Then the Tin Woodman went back to his friends, who wished him every joy
on account of his good fortune.

The Lion now walked to the Throne Room and knocked at the door.

"Come in," said Oz.

"I have come for my courage," announced the Lion, entering the room.

"Very well," answered the little man; "I will get it for you."

He went to a cupboard and reaching up to a high shelf took down a
square green bottle, the contents of which he poured into a green-gold
dish, beautifully carved.  Placing this before the Cowardly Lion, who
sniffed at it as if he did not like it, the Wizard said:

"Drink."

"What is it?" asked the Lion.

"Well," answered Oz, "if it were inside of you, it would be courage.
You know, of course, that courage is always inside one; so that this
really cannot be called courage until you have swallowed it.  Therefore
I advise you to drink it as soon as possible."

The Lion hesitated no longer, but drank till the dish was empty.

"How do you feel now?" asked Oz.

"Full of courage," replied the Lion, who went joyfully back to his
friends to tell them of his good fortune.

Oz, left to himself, smiled to think of his success in giving the
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion exactly what they thought
they wanted.  "How can I help being a humbug," he said, "when all these
people make me do things that everybody knows can't be done?  It was
easy to make the Scarecrow and the Lion and the Woodman happy, because
they imagined I could do anything.  But it will take more than
imagination to carry Dorothy back to Kansas, and I'm sure I don't know
how it can be done."




17.  How the Balloon Was Launched


For three days Dorothy heard nothing from Oz.  These were sad days for
the little girl, although her friends were all quite happy and
contented.  The Scarecrow told them there were wonderful thoughts in
his head; but he would not say what they were because he knew no one
could understand them but himself.  When the Tin Woodman walked about
he felt his heart rattling around in his breast; and he told Dorothy he
had discovered it to be a kinder and more tender heart than the one he
had owned when he was made of flesh.  The Lion declared he was afraid
of nothing on earth, and would gladly face an army or a dozen of the
fierce Kalidahs.

Thus each of the little party was satisfied except Dorothy, who longed
more than ever to get back to Kansas.

On the fourth day, to her great joy, Oz sent for her, and when she
entered the Throne Room he greeted her pleasantly:

"Sit down, my dear; I think I have found the way to get you out of this
country."

"And back to Kansas?" she asked eagerly.

"Well, I'm not sure about Kansas," said Oz, "for I haven't the faintest
notion which way it lies.  But the first thing to do is to cross the
desert, and then it should be easy to find your way home."

"How can I cross the desert?" she inquired.

"Well, I'll tell you what I think," said the little man.  "You see,
when I came to this country it was in a balloon.  You also came through
the air, being carried by a cyclone.  So I believe the best way to get
across the desert will be through the air.  Now, it is quite beyond my
powers to make a cyclone; but I've been thinking the matter over, and I
believe I can make a balloon."

"How?" asked Dorothy.

"A balloon," said Oz, "is made of silk, which is coated with glue to
keep the gas in it.  I have plenty of silk in the Palace, so it will be
no trouble to make the balloon.  But in all this country there is no
gas to fill the balloon with, to make it float."

"If it won't float," remarked Dorothy, "it will be of no use to us."

"True," answered Oz.  "But there is another way to make it float, which
is to fill it with hot air.  Hot air isn't as good as gas, for if the
air should get cold the balloon would come down in the desert, and we
should be lost."

"We!" exclaimed the girl.  "Are you going with me?"

"Yes, of course," replied Oz.  "I am tired of being such a humbug.  If
I should go out of this Palace my people would soon discover I am not a
Wizard, and then they would be vexed with me for having deceived them.
So I have to stay shut up in these rooms all day, and it gets tiresome.
I'd much rather go back to Kansas with you and be in a circus again."

"I shall be glad to have your company," said Dorothy.

"Thank you," he answered.  "Now, if you will help me sew the silk
together, we will begin to work on our balloon."

So Dorothy took a needle and thread, and as fast as Oz cut the strips
of silk into proper shape the girl sewed them neatly together.  First
there was a strip of light green silk, then a strip of dark green and
then a strip of emerald green; for Oz had a fancy to make the balloon
in different shades of the color about them.  It took three days to sew
all the strips together, but when it was finished they had a big bag of
green silk more than twenty feet long.

Then Oz painted it on the inside with a coat of thin glue, to make it
airtight, after which he announced that the balloon was ready.

"But we must have a basket to ride in," he said.  So he sent the
soldier with the green whiskers for a big clothes basket, which he
fastened with many ropes to the bottom of the balloon.

When it was all ready, Oz sent word to his people that he was going to
make a visit to a great brother Wizard who lived in the clouds.  The
news spread rapidly throughout the city and everyone came to see the
wonderful sight.

Oz ordered the balloon carried out in front of the Palace, and the
people gazed upon it with much curiosity.  The Tin Woodman had chopped
a big pile of wood, and now he made a fire of it, and Oz held the
bottom of the balloon over the fire so that the hot air that arose from
it would be caught in the silken bag.  Gradually the balloon swelled
out and rose into the air, until finally the basket just touched the
ground.

Then Oz got into the basket and said to all the people in a loud voice:

"I am now going away to make a visit.  While I am gone the Scarecrow
will rule over you.  I command you to obey him as you would me."

The balloon was by this time tugging hard at the rope that held it to
the ground, for the air within it was hot, and this made it so much
lighter in weight than the air without that it pulled hard to rise into
the sky.

"Come, Dorothy!" cried the Wizard.  "Hurry up, or the balloon will fly
away."

"I can't find Toto anywhere," replied Dorothy, who did not wish to
leave her little dog behind.  Toto had run into the crowd to bark at a
kitten, and Dorothy at last found him.  She picked him up and ran
towards the balloon.

She was within a few steps of it, and Oz was holding out his hands to
help her into the basket, when, crack! went the ropes, and the balloon
rose into the air without her.

"Come back!" she screamed.  "I want to go, too!"

"I can't come back, my dear," called Oz from the basket.  "Good-bye!"

"Good-bye!" shouted everyone, and all eyes were turned upward to where
the Wizard was riding in the basket, rising every moment farther and
farther into the sky.

And that was the last any of them ever saw of Oz, the Wonderful Wizard,
though he may have reached Omaha safely, and be there now, for all we
know.  But the people remembered him lovingly, and said to one another:

"Oz was always our friend.  When he was here he built for us this
beautiful Emerald City, and now he is gone he has left the Wise
Scarecrow to rule over us."

Still, for many days they grieved over the loss of the Wonderful
Wizard, and would not be comforted.




18.  Away to the South


Dorothy wept bitterly at the passing of her hope to get home to Kansas
again; but when she thought it all over she was glad she had not gone
up in a balloon.  And she also felt sorry at losing Oz, and so did her
companions.

The Tin Woodman came to her and said:

"Truly I should be ungrateful if I failed to mourn for the man who gave
me my lovely heart.  I should like to cry a little because Oz is gone,
if you will kindly wipe away my tears, so that I shall not rust."

"With pleasure," she answered, and brought a towel at once.  Then the
Tin Woodman wept for several minutes, and she watched the tears
carefully and wiped them away with the towel.  When he had finished, he
thanked her kindly and oiled himself thoroughly with his jeweled
oil-can, to guard against mishap.

The Scarecrow was now the ruler of the Emerald City, and although he
was not a Wizard the people were proud of him.  "For," they said,
"there is not another city in all the world that is ruled by a stuffed
man."  And, so far as they knew, they were quite right.

The morning after the balloon had gone up with Oz, the four travelers
met in the Throne Room and talked matters over.  The Scarecrow sat in
the big throne and the others stood respectfully before him.

"We are not so unlucky," said the new ruler, "for this Palace and the
Emerald City belong to us, and we can do just as we please.  When I
remember that a short time ago I was up on a pole in a farmer's
cornfield, and that now I am the ruler of this beautiful City, I am
quite satisfied with my lot."

"I also," said the Tin Woodman, "am well-pleased with my new heart;
and, really, that was the only thing I wished in all the world."

"For my part, I am content in knowing I am as brave as any beast that
ever lived, if not braver," said the Lion modestly.

"If Dorothy would only be contented to live in the Emerald City,"
continued the Scarecrow, "we might all be happy together."

"But I don't want to live here," cried Dorothy.  "I want to go to
Kansas, and live with Aunt Em and Uncle Henry."

"Well, then, what can be done?" inquired the Woodman.

The Scarecrow decided to think, and he thought so hard that the pins
and needles began to stick out of his brains.  Finally he said:

"Why not call the Winged Monkeys, and ask them to carry you over the
desert?"

"I never thought of that!" said Dorothy joyfully.  "It's just the
thing.  I'll go at once for the Golden Cap."

When she brought it into the Throne Room she spoke the magic words, and
soon the band of Winged Monkeys flew in through the open window and
stood beside her.

"This is the second time you have called us," said the Monkey King,
bowing before the little girl.  "What do you wish?"

"I want you to fly with me to Kansas," said Dorothy.

But the Monkey King shook his head.

"That cannot be done," he said.  "We belong to this country alone, and
cannot leave it.  There has never been a Winged Monkey in Kansas yet,
and I suppose there never will be, for they don't belong there.  We
shall be glad to serve you in any way in our power, but we cannot cross
the desert.  Good-bye."

And with another bow, the Monkey King spread his wings and flew away
through the window, followed by all his band.

Dorothy was ready to cry with disappointment.  "I have wasted the charm
of the Golden Cap to no purpose," she said, "for the Winged Monkeys
cannot help me."

"It is certainly too bad!" said the tender-hearted Woodman.

The Scarecrow was thinking again, and his head bulged out so horribly
that Dorothy feared it would burst.

"Let us call in the soldier with the green whiskers," he said, "and ask
his advice."

So the soldier was summoned and entered the Throne Room timidly, for
while Oz was alive he never was allowed to come farther than the door.

"This little girl," said the Scarecrow to the soldier, "wishes to cross
the desert.  How can she do so?"

"I cannot tell," answered the soldier, "for nobody has ever crossed the
desert, unless it is Oz himself."

"Is there no one who can help me?" asked Dorothy earnestly.

"Glinda might," he suggested.

"Who is Glinda?" inquired the Scarecrow.

"The Witch of the South.  She is the most powerful of all the Witches,
and rules over the Quadlings.  Besides, her castle stands on the edge
of the desert, so she may know a way to cross it."

"Glinda is a Good Witch, isn't she?" asked the child.

"The Quadlings think she is good," said the soldier, "and she is kind
to everyone.  I have heard that Glinda is a beautiful woman, who knows
how to keep young in spite of the many years she has lived."

"How can I get to her castle?" asked Dorothy.

"The road is straight to the South," he answered, "but it is said to be
full of dangers to travelers.  There are wild beasts in the woods, and
a race of queer men who do not like strangers to cross their country.
For this reason none of the Quadlings ever come to the Emerald City."

The soldier then left them and the Scarecrow said:

"It seems, in spite of dangers, that the best thing Dorothy can do is
to travel to the Land of the South and ask Glinda to help her.  For, of
course, if Dorothy stays here she will never get back to Kansas."

"You must have been thinking again," remarked the Tin Woodman.

"I have," said the Scarecrow.

"I shall go with Dorothy," declared the Lion, "for I am tired of your
city and long for the woods and the country again.  I am really a wild
beast, you know.  Besides, Dorothy will need someone to protect her."

"That is true," agreed the Woodman.  "My axe may be of service to her;
so I also will go with her to the Land of the South."

"When shall we start?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Are you going?" they asked, in surprise.

"Certainly.  If it wasn't for Dorothy I should never have had brains.
She lifted me from the pole in the cornfield and brought me to the
Emerald City.  So my good luck is all due to her, and I shall never
leave her until she starts back to Kansas for good and all."

"Thank you," said Dorothy gratefully.  "You are all very kind to me.
But I should like to start as soon as possible."

"We shall go tomorrow morning," returned the Scarecrow.  "So now let us
all get ready, for it will be a long journey."




19.  Attacked by the Fighting Trees


The next morning Dorothy kissed the pretty green girl good-bye, and
they all shook hands with the soldier with the green whiskers, who had
walked with them as far as the gate.  When the Guardian of the Gate saw
them again he wondered greatly that they could leave the beautiful City
to get into new trouble.  But he at once unlocked their spectacles,
which he put back into the green box, and gave them many good wishes to
carry with them.

"You are now our ruler," he said to the Scarecrow; "so you must come
back to us as soon as possible."

"I certainly shall if I am able," the Scarecrow replied; "but I must
help Dorothy to get home, first."

As Dorothy bade the good-natured Guardian a last farewell she said:

"I have been very kindly treated in your lovely City, and everyone has
been good to me.  I cannot tell you how grateful I am."

"Don't try, my dear," he answered.  "We should like to keep you with
us, but if it is your wish to return to Kansas, I hope you will find a
way."  He then opened the gate of the outer wall, and they walked forth
and started upon their journey.

The sun shone brightly as our friends turned their faces toward the
Land of the South.  They were all in the best of spirits, and laughed
and chatted together.  Dorothy was once more filled with the hope of
getting home, and the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were glad to be of
use to her.  As for the Lion, he sniffed the fresh air with delight and
whisked his tail from side to side in pure joy at being in the country
again, while Toto ran around them and chased the moths and butterflies,
barking merrily all the time.

"City life does not agree with me at all," remarked the Lion, as they
walked along at a brisk pace.  "I have lost much flesh since I lived
there, and now I am anxious for a chance to show the other beasts how
courageous I have grown."

They now turned and took a last look at the Emerald City.  All they
could see was a mass of towers and steeples behind the green walls, and
high up above everything the spires and dome of the Palace of Oz.

"Oz was not such a bad Wizard, after all," said the Tin Woodman, as he
felt his heart rattling around in his breast.

"He knew how to give me brains, and very good brains, too," said the
Scarecrow.

"If Oz had taken a dose of the same courage he gave me," added the
Lion, "he would have been a brave man."

Dorothy said nothing.  Oz had not kept the promise he made her, but he
had done his best, so she forgave him.  As he said, he was a good man,
even if he was a bad Wizard.

The first day's journey was through the green fields and bright flowers
that stretched about the Emerald City on every side.  They slept that
night on the grass, with nothing but the stars over them; and they
rested very well indeed.

In the morning they traveled on until they came to a thick wood.  There
was no way of going around it, for it seemed to extend to the right and
left as far as they could see; and, besides, they did not dare change
the direction of their journey for fear of getting lost.  So they
looked for the place where it would be easiest to get into the forest.

The Scarecrow, who was in the lead, finally discovered a big tree with
such wide-spreading branches that there was room for the party to pass
underneath.  So he walked forward to the tree, but just as he came
under the first branches they bent down and twined around him, and the
next minute he was raised from the ground and flung headlong among his
fellow travelers.

This did not hurt the Scarecrow, but it surprised him, and he looked
rather dizzy when Dorothy picked him up.

"Here is another space between the trees," called the Lion.

"Let me try it first," said the Scarecrow, "for it doesn't hurt me to
get thrown about."  He walked up to another tree, as he spoke, but its
branches immediately seized him and tossed him back again.

"This is strange," exclaimed Dorothy.  "What shall we do?"

"The trees seem to have made up their minds to fight us, and stop our
journey," remarked the Lion.

"I believe I will try it myself," said the Woodman, and shouldering his
axe, he marched up to the first tree that had handled the Scarecrow so
roughly.  When a big branch bent down to seize him the Woodman chopped
at it so fiercely that he cut it in two.  At once the tree began
shaking all its branches as if in pain, and the Tin Woodman passed
safely under it.

"Come on!" he shouted to the others.  "Be quick!"  They all ran forward
and passed under the tree without injury, except Toto, who was caught
by a small branch and shaken until he howled.  But the Woodman promptly
chopped off the branch and set the little dog free.

The other trees of the forest did nothing to keep them back, so they
made up their minds that only the first row of trees could bend down
their branches, and that probably these were the policemen of the
forest, and given this wonderful power in order to keep strangers out
of it.

The four travelers walked with ease through the trees until they came
to the farther edge of the wood.  Then, to their surprise, they found
before them a high wall which seemed to be made of white china.  It was
smooth, like the surface of a dish, and higher than their heads.

"What shall we do now?" asked Dorothy.

"I will make a ladder," said the Tin Woodman, "for we certainly must
climb over the wall."




20.  The Dainty China Country


While the Woodman was making a ladder from wood which he found in the
forest Dorothy lay down and slept, for she was tired by the long walk.
The Lion also curled himself up to sleep and Toto lay beside him.

The Scarecrow watched the Woodman while he worked, and said to him:

"I cannot think why this wall is here, nor what it is made of."

"Rest your brains and do not worry about the wall," replied the
Woodman.  "When we have climbed over it, we shall know what is on the
other side."

After a time the ladder was finished.  It looked clumsy, but the Tin
Woodman was sure it was strong and would answer their purpose.  The
Scarecrow waked Dorothy and the Lion and Toto, and told them that the
ladder was ready.  The Scarecrow climbed up the ladder first, but he
was so awkward that Dorothy had to follow close behind and keep him
from falling off.  When he got his head over the top of the wall the
Scarecrow said, "Oh, my!"

"Go on," exclaimed Dorothy.

So the Scarecrow climbed farther up and sat down on the top of the
wall, and Dorothy put her head over and cried, "Oh, my!" just as the
Scarecrow had done.

Then Toto came up, and immediately began to bark, but Dorothy made him
be still.

The Lion climbed the ladder next, and the Tin Woodman came last; but
both of them cried, "Oh, my!" as soon as they looked over the wall.
When they were all sitting in a row on the top of the wall, they looked
down and saw a strange sight.

Before them was a great stretch of country having a floor as smooth and
shining and white as the bottom of a big platter.  Scattered around
were many houses made entirely of china and painted in the brightest
colors.  These houses were quite small, the biggest of them reaching
only as high as Dorothy's waist.  There were also pretty little barns,
with china fences around them; and many cows and sheep and horses and
pigs and chickens, all made of china, were standing about in groups.

But the strangest of all were the people who lived in this queer
country.  There were milkmaids and shepherdesses, with brightly colored
bodices and golden spots all over their gowns; and princesses with most
gorgeous frocks of silver and gold and purple; and shepherds dressed in
knee breeches with pink and yellow and blue stripes down them, and
golden buckles on their shoes; and princes with jeweled crowns upon
their heads, wearing ermine robes and satin doublets; and funny clowns
in ruffled gowns, with round red spots upon their cheeks and tall,
pointed caps.  And, strangest of all, these people were all made of
china, even to their clothes, and were so small that the tallest of
them was no higher than Dorothy's knee.

No one did so much as look at the travelers at first, except one little
purple china dog with an extra-large head, which came to the wall and
barked at them in a tiny voice, afterwards running away again.

"How shall we get down?" asked Dorothy.

They found the ladder so heavy they could not pull it up, so the
Scarecrow fell off the wall and the others jumped down upon him so that
the hard floor would not hurt their feet.  Of course they took pains
not to light on his head and get the pins in their feet.  When all were
safely down they picked up the Scarecrow, whose body was quite
flattened out, and patted his straw into shape again.

"We must cross this strange place in order to get to the other side,"
said Dorothy, "for it would be unwise for us to go any other way except
due South."

They began walking through the country of the china people, and the
first thing they came to was a china milkmaid milking a china cow.  As
they drew near, the cow suddenly gave a kick and kicked over the stool,
the pail, and even the milkmaid herself, and all fell on the china
ground with a great clatter.

Dorothy was shocked to see that the cow had broken her leg off, and
that the pail was lying in several small pieces, while the poor
milkmaid had a nick in her left elbow.

"There!" cried the milkmaid angrily.  "See what you have done!  My cow
has broken her leg, and I must take her to the mender's shop and have
it glued on again.  What do you mean by coming here and frightening my
cow?"

"I'm very sorry," returned Dorothy.  "Please forgive us."

But the pretty milkmaid was much too vexed to make any answer.  She
picked up the leg sulkily and led her cow away, the poor animal limping
on three legs.  As she left them the milkmaid cast many reproachful
glances over her shoulder at the clumsy strangers, holding her nicked
elbow close to her side.

Dorothy was quite grieved at this mishap.

"We must be very careful here," said the kind-hearted Woodman, "or we
may hurt these pretty little people so they will never get over it."

A little farther on Dorothy met a most beautifully dressed young
Princess, who stopped short as she saw the strangers and started to run
away.

Dorothy wanted to see more of the Princess, so she ran after her.  But
the china girl cried out:

"Don't chase me!  Don't chase me!"

She had such a frightened little voice that Dorothy stopped and said,
"Why not?"

"Because," answered the Princess, also stopping, a safe distance away,
"if I run I may fall down and break myself."

"But could you not be mended?" asked the girl.

"Oh, yes; but one is never so pretty after being mended, you know,"
replied the Princess.

"I suppose not," said Dorothy.

"Now there is Mr. Joker, one of our clowns," continued the china lady,
"who is always trying to stand upon his head.  He has broken himself so
often that he is mended in a hundred places, and doesn't look at all
pretty.  Here he comes now, so you can see for yourself."

Indeed, a jolly little clown came walking toward them, and Dorothy
could see that in spite of his pretty clothes of red and yellow and
green he was completely covered with cracks, running every which way
and showing plainly that he had been mended in many places.

The Clown put his hands in his pockets, and after puffing out his
cheeks and nodding his head at them saucily, he said:

  "My lady fair,
     Why do you stare
   At poor old Mr. Joker?
     You're quite as stiff
   And prim as if
     You'd eaten up a poker!"


"Be quiet, sir!" said the Princess.  "Can't you see these are
strangers, and should be treated with respect?"

"Well, that's respect, I expect," declared the Clown, and immediately
stood upon his head.

"Don't mind Mr. Joker," said the Princess to Dorothy.  "He is
considerably cracked in his head, and that makes him foolish."

"Oh, I don't mind him a bit," said Dorothy.  "But you are so
beautiful," she continued, "that I am sure I could love you dearly.
Won't you let me carry you back to Kansas, and stand you on Aunt Em's
mantel?  I could carry you in my basket."

"That would make me very unhappy," answered the china Princess.  "You
see, here in our country we live contentedly, and can talk and move
around as we please.  But whenever any of us are taken away our joints
at once stiffen, and we can only stand straight and look pretty.  Of
course that is all that is expected of us when we are on mantels and
cabinets and drawing-room tables, but our lives are much pleasanter
here in our own country."

"I would not make you unhappy for all the world!" exclaimed Dorothy.
"So I'll just say good-bye."

"Good-bye," replied the Princess.

They walked carefully through the china country.  The little animals
and all the people scampered out of their way, fearing the strangers
would break them, and after an hour or so the travelers reached the
other side of the country and came to another china wall.

It was not so high as the first, however, and by standing upon the
Lion's back they all managed to scramble to the top.  Then the Lion
gathered his legs under him and jumped on the wall; but just as he
jumped, he upset a china church with his tail and smashed it all to
pieces.

"That was too bad," said Dorothy, "but really I think we were lucky in
not doing these little people more harm than breaking a cow's leg and a
church.  They are all so brittle!"

"They are, indeed," said the Scarecrow, "and I am thankful I am made of
straw and cannot be easily damaged.  There are worse things in the
world than being a Scarecrow."




21.  The Lion Becomes the King of Beasts


After climbing down from the china wall the travelers found themselves
in a disagreeable country, full of bogs and marshes and covered with
tall, rank grass.  It was difficult to walk without falling into muddy
holes, for the grass was so thick that it hid them from sight.
However, by carefully picking their way, they got safely along until
they reached solid ground.  But here the country seemed wilder than
ever, and after a long and tiresome walk through the underbrush they
entered another forest, where the trees were bigger and older than any
they had ever seen.

"This forest is perfectly delightful," declared the Lion, looking
around him with joy.  "Never have I seen a more beautiful place."

"It seems gloomy," said the Scarecrow.

"Not a bit of it," answered the Lion.  "I should like to live here all
my life.  See how soft the dried leaves are under your feet and how
rich and green the moss is that clings to these old trees.  Surely no
wild beast could wish a pleasanter home."

"Perhaps there are wild beasts in the forest now," said Dorothy.

"I suppose there are," returned the Lion, "but I do not see any of them
about."

They walked through the forest until it became too dark to go any
farther.  Dorothy and Toto and the Lion lay down to sleep, while the
Woodman and the Scarecrow kept watch over them as usual.

When morning came, they started again.  Before they had gone far they
heard a low rumble, as of the growling of many wild animals.  Toto
whimpered a little, but none of the others was frightened, and they
kept along the well-trodden path until they came to an opening in the
wood, in which were gathered hundreds of beasts of every variety.
There were tigers and elephants and bears and wolves and foxes and all
the others in the natural history, and for a moment Dorothy was afraid.
But the Lion explained that the animals were holding a meeting, and he
judged by their snarling and growling that they were in great trouble.

As he spoke several of the beasts caught sight of him, and at once the
great assemblage hushed as if by magic.  The biggest of the tigers came
up to the Lion and bowed, saying:

"Welcome, O King of Beasts!  You have come in good time to fight our
enemy and bring peace to all the animals of the forest once more."

"What is your trouble?" asked the Lion quietly.

"We are all threatened," answered the tiger, "by a fierce enemy which
has lately come into this forest.  It is a most tremendous monster,
like a great spider, with a body as big as an elephant and legs as long
as a tree trunk.  It has eight of these long legs, and as the monster
crawls through the forest he seizes an animal with a leg and drags it
to his mouth, where he eats it as a spider does a fly.  Not one of us
is safe while this fierce creature is alive, and we had called a
meeting to decide how to take care of ourselves when you came among us."

The Lion thought for a moment.

"Are there any other lions in this forest?" he asked.

"No; there were some, but the monster has eaten them all.  And,
besides, they were none of them nearly so large and brave as you."

"If I put an end to your enemy, will you bow down to me and obey me as
King of the Forest?" inquired the Lion.

"We will do that gladly," returned the tiger; and all the other beasts
roared with a mighty roar: "We will!"

"Where is this great spider of yours now?" asked the Lion.

"Yonder, among the oak trees," said the tiger, pointing with his
forefoot.

"Take good care of these friends of mine," said the Lion, "and I will
go at once to fight the monster."

He bade his comrades good-bye and marched proudly away to do battle
with the enemy.

The great spider was lying asleep when the Lion found him, and it
looked so ugly that its foe turned up his nose in disgust.  Its legs
were quite as long as the tiger had said, and its body covered with
coarse black hair.  It had a great mouth, with a row of sharp teeth a
foot long; but its head was joined to the pudgy body by a neck as
slender as a wasp's waist.  This gave the Lion a hint of the best way
to attack the creature, and as he knew it was easier to fight it asleep
than awake, he gave a great spring and landed directly upon the
monster's back.  Then, with one blow of his heavy paw, all armed with
sharp claws, he knocked the spider's head from its body.  Jumping down,
he watched it until the long legs stopped wiggling, when he knew it was
quite dead.

The Lion went back to the opening where the beasts of the forest were
waiting for him and said proudly:

"You need fear your enemy no longer."

Then the beasts bowed down to the Lion as their King, and he promised
to come back and rule over them as soon as Dorothy was safely on her
way to Kansas.




22.  The Country of the Quadlings


The four travelers passed through the rest of the forest in safety, and
when they came out from its gloom saw before them a steep hill, covered
from top to bottom with great pieces of rock.

"That will be a hard climb," said the Scarecrow, "but we must get over
the hill, nevertheless."

So he led the way and the others followed.  They had nearly reached the
first rock when they heard a rough voice cry out, "Keep back!"

"Who are you?" asked the Scarecrow.

Then a head showed itself over the rock and the same voice said, "This
hill belongs to us, and we don't allow anyone to cross it."

"But we must cross it," said the Scarecrow.  "We're going to the
country of the Quadlings."

"But you shall not!" replied the voice, and there stepped from behind
the rock the strangest man the travelers had ever seen.

He was quite short and stout and had a big head, which was flat at the
top and supported by a thick neck full of wrinkles.  But he had no arms
at all, and, seeing this, the Scarecrow did not fear that so helpless a
creature could prevent them from climbing the hill.  So he said, "I'm
sorry not to do as you wish, but we must pass over your hill whether
you like it or not," and he walked boldly forward.

As quick as lightning the man's head shot forward and his neck
stretched out until the top of the head, where it was flat, struck the
Scarecrow in the middle and sent him tumbling, over and over, down the
hill.  Almost as quickly as it came the head went back to the body, and
the man laughed harshly as he said, "It isn't as easy as you think!"

A chorus of boisterous laughter came from the other rocks, and Dorothy
saw hundreds of the armless Hammer-Heads upon the hillside, one behind
every rock.

The Lion became quite angry at the laughter caused by the Scarecrow's
mishap, and giving a loud roar that echoed like thunder, he dashed up
the hill.

Again a head shot swiftly out, and the great Lion went rolling down the
hill as if he had been struck by a cannon ball.

Dorothy ran down and helped the Scarecrow to his feet, and the Lion
came up to her, feeling rather bruised and sore, and said, "It is
useless to fight people with shooting heads; no one can withstand them."

"What can we do, then?" she asked.

"Call the Winged Monkeys," suggested the Tin Woodman.  "You have still
the right to command them once more."

"Very well," she answered, and putting on the Golden Cap she uttered
the magic words.  The Monkeys were as prompt as ever, and in a few
moments the entire band stood before her.

"What are your commands?" inquired the King of the Monkeys, bowing low.

"Carry us over the hill to the country of the Quadlings," answered the
girl.

"It shall be done," said the King, and at once the Winged Monkeys
caught the four travelers and Toto up in their arms and flew away with
them.  As they passed over the hill the Hammer-Heads yelled with
vexation, and shot their heads high in the air, but they could not
reach the Winged Monkeys, which carried Dorothy and her comrades safely
over the hill and set them down in the beautiful country of the
Quadlings.

"This is the last time you can summon us," said the leader to Dorothy;
"so good-bye and good luck to you."

"Good-bye, and thank you very much," returned the girl; and the Monkeys
rose into the air and were out of sight in a twinkling.

The country of the Quadlings seemed rich and happy.  There was field
upon field of ripening grain, with well-paved roads running between,
and pretty rippling brooks with strong bridges across them.  The fences
and houses and bridges were all painted bright red, just as they had
been painted yellow in the country of the Winkies and blue in the
country of the Munchkins.  The Quadlings themselves, who were short and
fat and looked chubby and good-natured, were dressed all in red, which
showed bright against the green grass and the yellowing grain.

The Monkeys had set them down near a farmhouse, and the four travelers
walked up to it and knocked at the door.  It was opened by the farmer's
wife, and when Dorothy asked for something to eat the woman gave them
all a good dinner, with three kinds of cake and four kinds of cookies,
and a bowl of milk for Toto.

"How far is it to the Castle of Glinda?" asked the child.

"It is not a great way," answered the farmer's wife.  "Take the road to
the South and you will soon reach it."

Thanking the good woman, they started afresh and walked by the fields
and across the pretty bridges until they saw before them a very
beautiful Castle.  Before the gates were three young girls, dressed in
handsome red uniforms trimmed with gold braid; and as Dorothy
approached, one of them said to her:

"Why have you come to the South Country?"

"To see the Good Witch who rules here," she answered.  "Will you take
me to her?"

"Let me have your name, and I will ask Glinda if she will receive you."
They told who they were, and the girl soldier went into the Castle.
After a few moments she came back to say that Dorothy and the others
were to be admitted at once.




23.  Glinda The Good Witch Grants Dorothy's Wish


Before they went to see Glinda, however, they were taken to a room of
the Castle, where Dorothy washed her face and combed her hair, and the
Lion shook the dust out of his mane, and the Scarecrow patted himself
into his best shape, and the Woodman polished his tin and oiled his
joints.

When they were all quite presentable they followed the soldier girl
into a big room where the Witch Glinda sat upon a throne of rubies.

She was both beautiful and young to their eyes.  Her hair was a rich
red in color and fell in flowing ringlets over her shoulders.  Her
dress was pure white but her eyes were blue, and they looked kindly
upon the little girl.

"What can I do for you, my child?" she asked.

Dorothy told the Witch all her story: how the cyclone had brought her
to the Land of Oz, how she had found her companions, and of the
wonderful adventures they had met with.

"My greatest wish now," she added, "is to get back to Kansas, for Aunt
Em will surely think something dreadful has happened to me, and that
will make her put on mourning; and unless the crops are better this
year than they were last, I am sure Uncle Henry cannot afford it."

Glinda leaned forward and kissed the sweet, upturned face of the loving
little girl.

"Bless your dear heart," she said, "I am sure I can tell you of a way
to get back to Kansas."  Then she added, "But, if I do, you must give
me the Golden Cap."

"Willingly!" exclaimed Dorothy; "indeed, it is of no use to me now, and
when you have it you can command the Winged Monkeys three times."

"And I think I shall need their service just those three times,"
answered Glinda, smiling.

Dorothy then gave her the Golden Cap, and the Witch said to the
Scarecrow, "What will you do when Dorothy has left us?"

"I will return to the Emerald City," he replied, "for Oz has made me
its ruler and the people like me.  The only thing that worries me is
how to cross the hill of the Hammer-Heads."

"By means of the Golden Cap I shall command the Winged Monkeys to carry
you to the gates of the Emerald City," said Glinda, "for it would be a
shame to deprive the people of so wonderful a ruler."

"Am I really wonderful?" asked the Scarecrow.

"You are unusual," replied Glinda.

Turning to the Tin Woodman, she asked, "What will become of you when
Dorothy leaves this country?"

He leaned on his axe and thought a moment.  Then he said, "The Winkies
were very kind to me, and wanted me to rule over them after the Wicked
Witch died.  I am fond of the Winkies, and if I could get back again to
the Country of the West, I should like nothing better than to rule over
them forever."

"My second command to the Winged Monkeys," said Glinda "will be that
they carry you safely to the land of the Winkies.  Your brain may not
be so large to look at as those of the Scarecrow, but you are really
brighter than he is--when you are well polished--and I am sure you will
rule the Winkies wisely and well."

Then the Witch looked at the big, shaggy Lion and asked, "When Dorothy
has returned to her own home, what will become of you?"

"Over the hill of the Hammer-Heads," he answered, "lies a grand old
forest, and all the beasts that live there have made me their King.  If
I could only get back to this forest, I would pass my life very happily
there."

"My third command to the Winged Monkeys," said Glinda, "shall be to
carry you to your forest.  Then, having used up the powers of the
Golden Cap, I shall give it to the King of the Monkeys, that he and his
band may thereafter be free for evermore."

The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion now thanked the Good
Witch earnestly for her kindness; and Dorothy exclaimed:

"You are certainly as good as you are beautiful!  But you have not yet
told me how to get back to Kansas."

"Your Silver Shoes will carry you over the desert," replied Glinda.
"If you had known their power you could have gone back to your Aunt Em
the very first day you came to this country."

"But then I should not have had my wonderful brains!" cried the
Scarecrow.  "I might have passed my whole life in the farmer's
cornfield."

"And I should not have had my lovely heart," said the Tin Woodman.  "I
might have stood and rusted in the forest till the end of the world."

"And I should have lived a coward forever," declared the Lion, "and no
beast in all the forest would have had a good word to say to me."

"This is all true," said Dorothy, "and I am glad I was of use to these
good friends.  But now that each of them has had what he most desired,
and each is happy in having a kingdom to rule besides, I think I should
like to go back to Kansas."

"The Silver Shoes," said the Good Witch, "have wonderful powers.  And
one of the most curious things about them is that they can carry you to
any place in the world in three steps, and each step will be made in
the wink of an eye.  All you have to do is to knock the heels together
three times and command the shoes to carry you wherever you wish to go."

"If that is so," said the child joyfully, "I will ask them to carry me
back to Kansas at once."

She threw her arms around the Lion's neck and kissed him, patting his
big head tenderly.  Then she kissed the Tin Woodman, who was weeping in
a way most dangerous to his joints.  But she hugged the soft, stuffed
body of the Scarecrow in her arms instead of kissing his painted face,
and found she was crying herself at this sorrowful parting from her
loving comrades.

Glinda the Good stepped down from her ruby throne to give the little
girl a good-bye kiss, and Dorothy thanked her for all the kindness she
had shown to her friends and herself.

Dorothy now took Toto up solemnly in her arms, and having said one last
good-bye she clapped the heels of her shoes together three times,
saying:

"Take me home to Aunt Em!"

Instantly she was whirling through the air, so swiftly that all she
could see or feel was the wind whistling past her ears.

The Silver Shoes took but three steps, and then she stopped so suddenly
that she rolled over upon the grass several times before she knew where
she was.

At length, however, she sat up and looked about her.

"Good gracious!" she cried.

For she was sitting on the broad Kansas prairie, and just before her
was the new farmhouse Uncle Henry built after the cyclone had carried
away the old one.  Uncle Henry was milking the cows in the barnyard,
and Toto had jumped out of her arms and was running toward the barn,
barking furiously.

Dorothy stood up and found she was in her stocking-feet.  For the
Silver Shoes had fallen off in her flight through the air, and were
lost forever in the desert.




24.  Home Again


Aunt Em had just come out of the house to water the cabbages when she
looked up and saw Dorothy running toward her.

"My darling child!" she cried, folding the little girl in her arms and
covering her face with kisses.  "Where in the world did you come from?"

"From the Land of Oz," said Dorothy gravely.  "And here is Toto, too.
And oh, Aunt Em!  I'm so glad to be at home again!"
